# 13a - Bechtel - (2001) Representations. From Neural Systems to Cognitive Systems

<!-- Page 1 -->

18
 Representations: From Neural
 Systems to Cognitive Systems
 William Bechtel
 One of the hallmarks of  cognitive  explanations of behavior is that they appeal to
mental representations and operations over them. For example, in explanations of
problem-solving behavior, cognitivists posit representations of the current situation,
the goal state, and of possible operations that might be performed, and construe
problem solving as involving such things as comparisons of the representations of
the current state and goal state and alterations in the representations of the current
state so as to determine the consequence of various operations. Many of the most
vociferous debates in the cognitive science literature have focused on the format of
representations -  whether they take the form of language-like symbols (or even
natural language expressions themselves), pictures or images, or the sorts of dis
tributed representations identified in connectionist models.
 Given the propensity of scientists and philosophers to challenge even the most
basic assumptions of their inquiry, it should not be surprising that some 30 years
into the cognitive revolution some investigators —in particular, those advocating
dynamical explanations of cognitive phenomena - would begin to challenge the very
need for representations. However, although appeals to internal representations are
rampant in cognitive science, they are not limited to that field. Biologists in a variety
of fields refer to molecular structures as representations. Of special importance to
our purposes, neuroscientists, especially behavioral and cognitive neuroscientists,
routinely refer to brain activities as representations. This raises a question: should
the attacks on representations that have emerged recently in cognitive science apply
equally to appeals to representations in neuroscience?11 will argue, rather, that there
is a viable notion of representation that is being employed in neuroscience that is
not subject to the dynamicist’s challenge. This answer, however, raises a further ques
tion: is this notion of representation adequate for the purposes for which cognitivists
have appealed to representations. In the last section I will sketch how one might build
up from the conception of representation employed in neuroscience to one adequate
for cognitive accounts.


<!-- Page 2 -->

From Neural Systems to Cognitive Systems  333
 Figure 18.1  Watt’s centrifugal governor for a steam engine. Drawing from J. Farley,  A Treatise
 on the Steam Engine: Historical, Practical, and  Descriptive  (London: Longman, Rees, Orme, Brown
and Green, 1927).
 1  The Dynamicist's Critique of Representations
 The basic complaint of the dynamicist critics of representations is that physical
systems lacking representations could accomplish many or all of the various tasks
for  which  cognitivists had  postulated  internal representations  (and  operations
involving them). One strategy the critics used to mount their case was to present
examples of systems that accomplish tasks for which we might be tempted to posit
representations (e.g. problem-solving tasks) and to demonstrate ways of accom
plishing such tasks without internal representations. Van Gelder’s (1995) example
of the governor James Watt introduced for his steam engine is perhaps the best
known.
 The task facing Watt was to regulate the output of steam from a steam engine so
that the flywheel would rotate at a constant speed regardless of the resistance being
generated by the appliances connected to it. Watt’s governor was ingeniously simple
(figure 18.1). He attached a spindle on a flywheel driven by the steam generated by
the steam engine, and attached arms to the spindle which would, as a result of cen
trifugal force, open out in proportion to the speed at which the flywheel turned. A
mechanical linkage between the arms connected the arms to the steam valve so that,
when the wheel turned too fast, the valve would close, releasing less steam, thereby
slowing the flywheel, but when the flywheel turned too slowly, the valve would open,
releasing more steam and speeding up the flywheel. It is in part the simplicity of this
device that led van Gelder to reject a representationalist interpretation in which the


<!-- Page 3 -->

angle of the arms represented the speed of the flywheel. But, van Gelder argued,
the Watt governor solves the very kind of problem for which a cognitivist might be
tempted to develop a representationalist solution —one, for example, in which the
present and desired speed of the flywheel as well as the operations of opening and
closing the steam valve are represented, and rules that apply to the representations
are invoked to determine how much to open or close the valve (think of how a com
puter might be programmed to perform this task). Thus, the Watt governor, for van
Gelder, demonstrates how one might perform cognitive tasks that seemingly require
representations without them, motivating the program of trying to account for
cognitive activities more broadly without positing representations.
 One response to van Gelder’s strategy is to grant that some simple tasks for which
one might be tempted to posit representations do not in fact require them, but to
contend that there are other tasks that are “representation-hungry” and do require
them (Clark and Toribio, 1994). In this vein, Grush (chapter 19, this volume) argues
that we find representations only in contexts where the system does not have imme
diate access to what is represented, and so representations stand in for what is not
physically or temporarily present. In contrast, I have adopted an extreme position
and argued that there are representations even in the Watt governor (Bechtel, 1998).
Many philosophers have found this to be a mission of madness. They maintain that
the notion of representation loses its interest if we can indeed find representations
in such simple systems. In this chapter I argue that this is not the case by showing
that this is precisely the kind of system for which cognitive neuroscience finds
the notion of representation indispensable. When techniques such as single-cell
recording and neuroimaging are employed to understand how the brain performs
cognitive tasks, implicitly the notion of representation on which they are relying
is the same as I invoked in identifying representations in the Watt governor. Thus,
rather than being too simple to have representations, the Watt governor provides a
simple, illustrative case where we can readily observe the importance of appeals to
representations.
 334  Representation
 2  The Watt Governor as an Exemplar
 Representational System
 Central to demonstrating the presence of representations in the Watt governor is
the articulation of an analysis of what it is for something to be a representation. In
its most basic sense, a representation is something (an event or process) that stands
in for and carries information about what it represents, enabling the system in which
it occurs to use that information in directing its behavior. In the simplest case, the
system actually acts upon that which is represented (see figure 18.2). For example,
we employ maps to stand in for the actual geography, and use those maps to coor
dinate our behavior in a way that is responsive to that geography - finding a route
to a target location or circumventing an obstacle. The angle arms of the Watt gov
ernor play such a standing-in role: they stand in for the speed of the steam engine


<!-- Page 4 -->

From Neural Systems to Cognitive Systems  335
 Figure 18.2  Three components in an analysis of a representation: the representation Y carries
information about X for Z, which uses Y in order to act or think about X.
 linkage
 Figure 18.3  Application of this scheme to the Watt governor. The spindle arms carry informa
tion about the speed of the flywheel for the valve opening system, which uses the angle to deter
mine the opening, thereby regulating the speed of the flywheel.
 in a mechanism that controls the opening and closing of the steam valve and it is
because they so stand in that the governor is able to regulate the flow of steam appro
priately for the current speed of the flywheel. If someone did not immediately per
ceive how the governor performed its function, what one would do is explain how
the angle of the arms responds to the speed with which the flywheel is turning (i.e.
it carries information about the speed), thereby making this information available in
a format that can be used by the linkage mechanism to control the flow of steam and
thus the speed of the flywheel at a future time (figure 18:3).


<!-- Page 5 -->

This characterization of what it is to be a representation has two components.
One is the idea of an information-bearing state. As Dretske (1981), among others,
has argued, information can be analyzed causally -  an effect of a process carries
information about its cause (specifically, that an event of the kind that could cause
a particular effect had indeed occurred). Thus, thunder carries information about an
electrical discharge. But Millikan (1984) stresses that being a causal effect is not suf
ficient to turn something into a representation. Something becomes a representation
because of how it is used by a system in controlling its behavior. It is because a system
is  designed  so as to use a state to inform it about something distal that makes the state
a representation.
 In this analysis, emphasis is placed on  design , on how the system is designed to
use information-bearing states in coordinating its behavior. One does not just look
to how it in fact uses a particular information-bearing state. Otherwise, we end up
with an account in which the meaning of a representation depends on whatever
ways it is used. An account which appeals to actual use is often referred to a con
ceptual role semantics, and such accounts have been subject to powerful criticisms
(Cummins, 1996). But in my analysis, it is only the designed use that matters. An
appeal to the notion of design, of course, requires an account of what it is for some
thing to be designed to do one thing rather than another. In biological systems the
usual route is to argue that what something was designed to do was that which its
predecessors did more successfully than their competitors and, thus, contributed to
their differential reproductive success. It can be relatively easy to tell a story about
how a particular trait of an organism contributed to its differential reproductive
success (these are often criticized as “just-so stories”), but difficult (though not
impossible) to actually demonstrate that the trait really did contribute in this way
(Griffiths, 1997). In the case of artifacts that we have designed, we sometimes have
privileged access to information about what they were designed to do.
 According to this analysis of representations, only some of the things that cause
a representation to appear are what it represents. It is in this way that one can account
for misrepresentation, and show how states or events can represent things that are
not their immediate cause. In biological evolution, a mechanism may be selected in
which a state is only rarely actually produced by that which it represents - if it is
important that the system respond to the distal state when it occurs, a system may
evolve that is subject to many false alarms. In systems designed by humans, we can
take this to the extreme - we can design a system in which a particular internal state
would occur (or at least be more likely to occur) in response to a distal state, but
where the distal state has never occurred and all occurrences of the response have
been false alarms (e.g. a system designed to detect a nuclear missile attack).
 Behind at least some of the opposition to finding representations in the Watt gov
ernor is the fear that if they occur there, representations are everywhere and there
is no theoretical bite in calling something a representation (see Haselager and de
Groot, forthcoming, for such an argument). Although I will soon argue that there is
a point to some promiscuousness about representations, let me first show that under
this analysis, representations are not as promiscuous as feared. States or events
 336  Representation


<!-- Page 6 -->

337
 that carry information are indeed ubiquitous. Any causal effect carries information
about what caused it. In emphasizing the consumer, however, we emphasize the kind
of system in which the representation occurs. The Watt governor is a particular kind
of physical system —a system that is designed to employ states bearing information
to control its behavior. While there are many such systems within evolved organisms
and human artifacts, not all natural systems employ internal states in such a manner.
Representations are found only in those systems in which there is another process
(a consumer) designed to use the representation in generating its behavior (in the
simplest cases, to coordinate its behavior with respect to what is represented) and
where the fact that the representation carried that information was the reason the
down-line process was designed to rely on the representation.
 Even though this analysis does not make representations as ubiquitous as might
be feared, it does entail that representations will appear in many non-cognitive
systems.  Many physiological systems  (e.g. simple biochemical systems such as
fermentation where reactions are controlled by feedback mechanisms in which the
availability of the product of the reaction determines whether it will continue) will,
on this construal, employ representations since processes in them as well as the
responses to them were selected because of the process’s information-bearing role.
But this, I would contend, is as it should be. Representational or intentional vocab
ulary is in fact regularly used in the sciences dealing with such systems. Without it,
scientists would be hard pressed to explain how these systems perform the tasks for
which they appear to have evolved. In this context, the Watt governor provides a
simple model of the role representational discourse is playing in allowing us to
explain such systems.
 From Neural Systems to Cognitive Systems
 3  Representational States in Brains
 As I noted above, representational talk is widely used in behavioral and cognitive
neuroscience. A particularly clear example is Penfield and Rasmussen’s (1950)
homuncular maps of how the sensory and motor cortex represents different parts of
the body (in which they emphasize in terms of the distorted sizes of the homuncu
lus’s organs how the maps devote more area to regions from which more sensory
input is received or over which there is more motor control —see figure 4.2, above).2
This is extremely natural insofar as neuroscientists are attempting to analyze how
various components of the brain gather and use information in the course of pro
ducing behavior. In this section I will draw upon neuroscience research into visual
processing in the brain, described more fully in Part III, to show that the appeals of
neuroscientists to representations do indeed conform to the analysis in the previous
section.
 Although there are various choices as to what sorts of neural states or processes
serve a representational function, a reasonable place to begin is to assume that it is
the firing rate or firing pattern of individual neurons that serves as representations.


<!-- Page 7 -->

If that is the case, what one needs in order to understand the representational system
of the brain is means tp record the electrical activity of individual neurons and then
to determine their representational content. Techniques for implanting electrodes in
or next to individual neurons and then amplifying the signal and playing it through
an audiometer were developed in the early decades of the twentieth century. The
challenge was then to make sense of the firing patterns that could be detected.
Although I am arguing that the focus in construing a state or event as a representa
tion is on the consumer of the representation, neuroscientists typically begin by
trying to correlate neural activity with external processes that they might represent
(as with the method of single-cell recording - see chapter 4, this volume). This is,
indeed, quite sensible and does not undercut my claim. An extremely useful first step
in determining what the system takes a state or event to represent is to ascertain what
information a state or event might carry. Then one can ask the question of how the
system was designed to use the information.
 Penfield and Rasmussen’s homuncular representation  of sensory cortex was
arrived at through single-cell recording (the homuncular representation of motor
cortex resulting from related experiments in which weak electrical stimuli were sup
plied through electrodes to see what motor organs the stimulated cells would affect).
Talbot and Marshall (1941) were the first to apply single-cell recording to cells in
the occipital lobe, which was already recognized as figuring in visual processing on
the basis of lesion studies. They recorded from cells in Brodmann’s area 17 (which
later came to be known as VI) in anesthetized cats and monkeys, and correlated acti
vations there with the location of stimuli in the animal’s visual field. They showed
that each cell responded to a stimulus in a particular part of the visual field (the cell’s
 receptivefield)  and confirmed that cells were so organized in the cortex that they con
stituted a map that preserved the topography of the visual field (see figure 18.4). To
determine what the firing of a cell represented, however, required a further step -
determining what kinds of stimuli, when present in a cell’s receptive field, caused it
to fire. Stephen Kuffler (1953) provided the model for this type of investigation.
He recorded from cells in the retina and the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) and
determined that they were most activated either by a light stimulus in the center of
the cell’s receptive field surrounded by a dark area (an  on-center  cell), or by a light
surround of a dark center (an  off-center  cell; see figures 13.3 and 13.4, above).
 As recounted in chapters 10 and 13, Hubei and Wiesel (1962, 1968) extended
Kuffler’s approach to primary visual cortex, discovering that cells there responded
to bars of light. They found that some cells, which they identified as  simple cells
 (figure 13.3, C-G), responded to bars with specific orientation only in specific areas
of the cell’s receptive field, whereas others, which they referred to as  complex cells,
 responded to bars with a specific orientation anywhere within the receptive field.
The result of Hubei and Wiesel’s research was to suggest that firing of cells in VI
represented bars or lines at specific orientations in parts of the visual field.
 Chapter 13, above, relates how, in the years after Hubei and Wiesel’s pioneering
research, discovery of cells in different prestriate, temporal, and parietal lobe areas
which responded to specific visual features (color in V4, motion in M T/V 5, shapes
 338  Representation


<!-- Page 8 -->

Visual field
 Figure 18.4  Talbot and Marshall’s (1941) projection of areas of the visual field on to primary
visual cortex in the cat, based on single-cell recording.
 Posterior


<!-- Page 9 -->

340  Representation
 Figure 18.5  Hubei and WiesePs proposal for a wiring diagram linking with excitatory connec
tions from lateral geniculate cells with  on  centers to a simple cell in primary visual cortex that is
excited by an oriented bar of light. From Hubei and Weisel, 1962, p. 142. Reprinted with permis
sion of the Physiological Society.
 in inferior temporal cortex, and location information in posterior parietal cortex)
continued with vigor. Van Essen and Gallant (chapter 12, this volume) indicate that
33 brain areas have been identified as principally involved in visual processing. Many
of these have been shown to represent different specific types of visual information
and currently much effort is being extended to developing accounts of how these
representations figure in an overall processing scheme.
 As I noted, most of this work has relied on establishing what information might
be carried by different neural firings. The account of representation I endorsed,
however, placed primary emphasis on the consumer of the representations. But a
concern with the consumer of the representation is at least tacit in such research.
Investigators would have had little interest in figuring out the information relation
between brain activity and distal stimuli unless they assumed the brain was using
this information in further processing. To determine how the brain actually con
sumes this information requires developing processing models which show how acti
vations in later areas in visual pathways utilize the information encoded in earlier
stages of processing. The early work of Hubei and Wiesel again provided an exem
plar. They proposed simple wiring diagrams of how LG N cells might be wired to
simple VI cells and simple VI cells in turn to complex VI cells which were designed
to show how downstream cells could compute their representations from more
upstream representations (see figure 18.5). By showing that processes at each stage
respond to those upstream to arrive at their characteristic response, they show that
the upstream processes were representations.3 Even in this example, the processing
is more complex than in the Watt governor, where the consumer employed a simple
mechanical linkage. Often complex computational models are required to character
ize the processing mechanisms through which representations are used by later
stages in processing (this is especially true when it is recognized that the feedback
or recurrent processing plays a major role). Much current work, especially in com
putational neuroscience, is devoted to developing processing models showing how


<!-- Page 10 -->

later visual areas can generate their representations from what is represented in
earlier visual areas.
 Part of the challenge in understanding the consumption of visual representations
is that the visual areas are often many steps removed from any behavior, for the
performance of which the organism relies on visual information. This is especially
true in the ventral pathway from primary visual areas into temporal areas, through
which object recognition is assumed to occur (see chapter 11, this volume). Object
representations developed in inferior temporal cortex are thought to be employed in
higher cognitive processes such as reasoning and problem solving, the detailed neural
mechanisms of which have not yet been identified. In the dorsal pathway proceed
ing to the posterior parietal cortex, on the other hand, it has been easier for
researchers to focus on the question of how putative representational states figure
in guiding motor action. The basic strategy was developed by Goldman-Rakic (1987)
in her research on prefrontal brain areas. She found cells, for example, that were
active when a monkey had to temporarily remember a specific direction in which
it was directed to move its eyes after a delay interval. She was able to establish that
certain cells were active only when the monkey would correctly remember the par
ticular direction of eye movement.
 Even when researchers discover sufficient cues to develop an interpretation of
what a neural pattern represents, the process of interpretation is quite indirect. This
is nicely illustrated in a puzzle Larry Snyder has attempted to address. Focusing on
neurons in the parietal cortex which fire when the animal is required to move its arm
to a specific location, he asked whether these neurons represented the location to
which the animal was  attending  or the location to which the animal  intended  to move.
To do this, Snyder developed experimental protocols in which monkeys had to attend
to one location while holding an intention to move to another location. This revealed
that different areas in the parietal cortex were involved in representing the intention
than were involved in simply attending to a location (Snyder et al., 1997; Batista
etal., 1999).
 A word of caution is needed. Since the brain is much more complex than the Watt
governor and we lack independent access to the design process, hypotheses about
what is represented by specific neural activity must be treated as extremely tenta
tive. The project of single-cell recording is limited by the stimuli one thinks to test.
It was through serendipity that Hubei and Wiesel thought to test bar stimuli in VI
and that Gross thought to test hand-shaped stimuli for an area in the inferior tem
poral cortex. It would be easy for a researcher simply to fail to test whether a par
ticular stimulus would drive a cell. In this light it is important to note that Van Essen
and Gallant (chapter 12, this volume) found that esoteric stimuli, such as expanding
or rotating stimuli, would cause specific M STd cells, which fired weakly in response
to straight line movements, to fire vigorously. Moreover, one should not assume that
the cell is only carrying information about the stimulus that causes it to fire more
vigorously. As Van Essen and Gallant stress, less than full responses may still carry
important information that can be used by downstream consumers. Thus, cells may
not be feature detectors, but may be better construed as filters with a representa
 From Neural Systems to Cognitive Systems  341


<!-- Page 11 -->

tional profile. Finally, as Akins (chapter 20, this volume) emphasizes, neurons do not
respond to objective features of the world that we assume they would represent,
when we think about how we might design a system from scratch. For example, they
may not respond to absolute properties, such as temperature, but rather their
response may be relative to the current state of the organism (e.g. whether the stim
ulus is warmer or colder than background stimulation). (Although Akins rejects a
representational analysis, see chapter 16, this volume, for a representational account
compatible with these findings.)
 In this section I have been focusing on how neuroscientists investigate the repre
sentational content of neural firings. A skeptic about representations might question
what the scientist gains by identifying particular neural activities as representations.
Why not setde for a simple causal model identifying the dynamics of activity in the
brain? To answer this question, we need to bear in mind what the goal of inquiry is.
Neuroscientists generally assume that the brain is a complex machine whose activ
ity allows the organism to coordinate its behavior with features of its environment.
As with the Watt governor, once one has identified components in the system, one
wants to know how they facilitate the organism as it extracts information about its
environment and deploys that information in determining its behavior. Someone
examining Watt’s invention might ask: What do the spindle arms do in the gover
nor? The answer would be: They represent information as to whether the flywheel
is moving too fast or too slow and pass this information to the valve that controls the
steam flow. Similarly, one might ask: What does area V4 do in the brain? The kind
of answer a neuroscientist would offer is that it represents information about the
color of stimuli and provides this information to other areas which use it to deter
mine the identity of the stimulus. Accordingly, construing internal states as repre
senting various aspects of the environment is critical to this endeavor.
 342  Representation
 4  From Brain Representations to Cognitive Representations
 One response to the line of argument in the previous section is to acknowledge that
there may be a role for positing representations that fit the above analysis in neuro
science, but to deny that such representations are sufficient for the business of cog
nitive science. Indeed, the representations that have figured in many cognitive models
employ a much more complex format, often one drawn from formal logic and natural
languages. Some have argued that language-like or propositional representations are
required if we are to account for the cognitive abilities exhibited at least by humans,
since humans must encode complex relational information and be able to extract rep
resentations of components as needed. Fodor (1975, 1987) has argued that only rep
resentations that share critical properties with language, especially that of having
a compositional syntax and semantics, are adequate for modeling thought. When
compositional rules are invoked, lexical items are put together according to syntac
tic rules in such a way that the meaning of the composed structure is built up from
the meaning of the component lexical items.


<!-- Page 12 -->

343
 The key to Fodor’s argument is the observation that human cognition (and
perhaps that of other species) exhibits a number of special properties, especially
productivity and systematicity. Productivity and systematicity are properties mani
fest in natural languages, and Fodor argues that they are exhibited in thought as well.
Productivity with respect to language refers to the capacity to indefinitely extend the
corpus of sentences in a language; applied to thought, it refers to the fact that the
range of possible thoughts is not bounded. Systematicity with respect to language
refers to the fact that there are relations between the sentences of a language such
that if one string is well formed, so is another that results from appropriate substi
tutions. For example, if  the florist loves Mary  is a sentence of English, so is  Mary
 loves theflorist.  Applied to thought, it designates the fact that a cognitive system that
can think one such thought automatically has the capacity to think the other. In a
linguistic system in which sentences are composed employing syntactic rules, these
properties arise automatically, and would accrue equally to a cognitive system if it
employed representations that are language-like in relying on a compositional syntax.
Just as he has faulted the representations found in  connectionist networks as
incapable of accounting for these properties (Fodor and Pylyshyn, 1988), Fodor
would find the sort of representation found in the Watt governor or identified in the
activities of individual neurons to lack the requisite compositionality and thus to be
incapable of exhibiting these properties.
 One unfortunate consequence of grounding explanations of cognitive capacities
in language-like representations is that it leaves unanswered the question of how
such representations might be embodied in the brain. It is clear that the brain is a
mechanism that can comprehend and produce linguistic structures, and so must have
tools for representing such structures, but it is far less clear that it uses language
like structures for its own internal representations. So there is motivation for start
ing with representations of the sort discussed in the previous section -  ones that
seem to figure in the brain itself. The analysis of representations cannot end there,
however. Rather, one must show how to build up from the sorts of representations
found in the brain to those that exhibit the requisite compositionality.
 While filling in the gap between the sort of neural representations I have been
discussing and ones that exhibit productivity and systematicity may seem like a
tall order, Larry Barsalou’s recent work on concepts suggests how it might be done
(Barsalou, 1999). Attacking amodal language-like symbols (symbols not tied to a par
ticular sensory modality), Barsalou has argued that “perceptual representations can
play  all  of the critical symbolic functions that amodal symbols play in traditional
systems, such that amodal symbols become redundant.” Barsalou is clear that the
perceptual representations he is considering are neural —he describes perceptual
symbols as “records of the neural states that underlie perception.” (Although much
of his discussion focuses on visual perception, he intends his account to include per
ception in other modalities, including perception of emotion and introspection.)
 The  attempt  to  ground  cognition  in  perception  goes back at  least  to  the
seventeenth-century Empiricists in philosophy, such as Locke. Their program has
been much ridiculed, but the target in most attacks is the view that perception gives
 From Neural Systems to Cognitive Systems


<!-- Page 13 -->

rise to. static pictures or images (images of which we are consciously aware) that are
holistic recordings of the input. Perceptual representations for Barsalou, however,
are not (despite his reference to them as “records of neural states”) pictures or images
 - they are not recordings. In particular, they are interpreted in such a way that “spe
cific tokens in perception (i.e. individuals) [are bound] to knowledge for general types
of things in memory (i.e. concepts).” The key to this move is a proper understand
ing of neural processing in vision -  the brain is not constructing a picture of the
world (if it did, it would then need another perceiver to view the picture), but an
analysis of the visual input geared to action. This is already suggested by the way
the brain decomposes visual processing, with different brain areas analyzing distinct
features of a scene as color, shape, or location. Neural activity in different brain areas
represents categorization and conceptualization of the visual input - it contains  this
 shape,  this  color, or occurs at  this  location.
 Barsalou refers to perceptual representations as schematic representations in that
only certain features of the perceptual input are represented. He appeals to psycho
logical research on attention to show how a schematic representation is constructed
 - selective attention isolates and emphasizes pieces of information that is given in
perception and facilitates storage of these features in long-term memory. Recent
neural research on attention could support the same analysis. Relying on the evi
dence that different features  of stimuli are analyzed  in  different brain areas,
Corbetta et al. (1993) have shown that when subjects are required to differentially
attend to different properties of stimuli, brain areas responsible for processing those
features are activated, indicating that particular features are being processed. The
fact that perceptual symbols are schematic in this manner allows them to be inde
terminate in ways that pictures cannot - representing a tiger, for example, as having
stripes, but not a determinate number of stripes.
 In addition to emphasizing the schematic character of perceptual representa
tions, Barsalou also emphasizes their dynamic character. Different neural records are
related temporally in experience, and they give rise to simulations of the way we can
attend to different parts of an object over time or the way it itself changes over time.
(Like a perceptual representation itself, a simulation is not just a repetition of pre
vious experiences, but a composed structure in which individual components can
be put together differently on different occasions. Barsalou refers to the organizing
information specifying how different perceptual representations can be related as
 frames , thereby invoking previous cognitive science research on the type of complex
information structures that seem to figure in cognition.) For Barsalou, this allows
individual perceptual representations to be integrated into what he terms “simula
tion competences,” a capacity that is expanded as humans learn languages which
allow them to index and control features in a simulation.
 For Barsalou, linguistic representations extend the capacities of the conceptual
system built on perceptual representations. He proposes that:
 As people hear or read a text, they use productively formulated sentences to construct
 a productively formulated representation that constitutes a semantic interpretation.
 344  Representation


<!-- Page 14 -->

345
 Conversely, during language production, the construction o f a simulation activates
 associated words and syntactic patterns, which become candidates for spoken sentences
 designed to produce a similar simulation in a listener.
 But it is clear that while linguistic indexing supplements the cognitive capacities pro
vided by perceptual symbols, it is the perceptual symbols themselves that do the cog
nitive work for Barsalou. In fact, linguistic symbols are, for him, acquired as simply
additional perceptual symbols. Thus, it is important for him to show that they can
have the sorts of properties Fodor argued were needed for cognition - productivity
and systematicity -  without appealing to language-like representations. Barsalou
maintains that the very features of perceptual symbols that I have already reviewed
provide him the resources to do this.4 The key is that perceptual symbols and
simulations are built up componentially, and thus, just as with linguistic representa
tions, they can be continually put together in new ways, thereby accounting for pro
ductivity. They also permit substitutions of different component representations,
thereby accounting for systematicity. Barsalou illustrates this potential by employ
ing diagrams much like those used by cognitive linguists (Langacker, 1987). Figure
18.6 is an example. It illustrates how perceptual symbols for object categories (A)
and spatial relations (B) can be (C) combined, even (D) recursively, to productively
generate new representations. The symbols in this diagram (e.g. the balloon and air
plane in A) are not intended as pictures, but to stand for perceptual representations,
that is, configurations of neurons that would be activated in representing these
objects. The boxes with thin solid lines are intended to represent simulation com
petences that have developed over many experiences with the object or relation
and represent it schematically. The boxes with thick slashed lines then represent
particular simulations that might be generated from the simulation competences by
combining them, sometimes recursively.
 The preceding is only a partial sketch of Barsalou’s account of perceptual symbols
(he goes on to suggest how even abstract concepts such as  truth  can be constructed
from perceptual representations), but it does indicate that there are ways of build
ing up from the sorts of representations found in the brain. The key ingredient in
his account is the construal of the kind of analysis the visual system performs, by
having different neurons represent such things as shape and color of stimuli,
as involving categorization and conceptualization. The separately analyzed features
afford composition, thereby providing a resource similar to that Fodor identified for
language-like representations. (Perceptual symbols, however, do not thereby become
implementations  for Fodorian language-like symbols -  perceptual symbols are
modality-specific and the particular features of the symbols themselves gener
ally specify definite features in what they represent.  Unlike amodal language
like symbols, the particular embodiment of the symbols as patterns of neural
firing in particular brain regions is important to the information that they carry.
One  consequence  of  this,  which  Barsalou  happily  endorses,  is  that  different
individuals, with different learning histories, are likely to have somewhat different
representations.)
 From Neural Systems to Cognitive Systems


<!-- Page 15 -->

A
 k2>
 OO OOQ
 spatial relations (B) implement productivity through combinatorial (C) and recursive (D) pro
cessing. Boxes with thin solid lines represent simulation competences; boxes with thick dashed
lines represent simulations. From Barsalou, 1999, p. 593. Reprinted with permission of Cambridge
University Press.


<!-- Page 16 -->

From Neural Systems to Cognitive Systems
 5  Conclusions
 347
 I began this chapter articulating a minimal notion of representation, wherein a
representation is an information-bearing state or event which stands in for what it
represents and enables the system in which it operates to utilize this information in
coordinating its behavior. I argued that representations of this minimal sort are found
even in the Watt governor, a simple mechanical device that has figured in some of
the opposition to the invocation of representations in cognitive science. I also
contended that this minimal notion is what is required for most neuroscientists’ ref
erences to representations in the brain. In the final section, I tried to show how one
might build  these neural  representations  up  into  representations  that  exhibit
properties such as productivity and systematicity, which have been argued to be
characteristics of thought.
 Notes
 1  For arguments that answer this question in the affirmative, see chapter 21, this volume.
 2  Although I am focusing primarily on representations whose content is fixed by what
causes them, the accounts can be generalized to representations in the motor system in
which the content is specified by what the representations are designed to cause (Mandik,
1999). Although the story gets more complex, one can even conceive o f representations
for which we need to appeal to both their sensory causes and motor effects in specifying
their content.
 3  Eventually, researchers hope to discover complete pathways through the system that
result in behavioral responses that are appropriate to the information represented at each
stage in the system. Until this stage is reached, each imputation o f a representation to
processes in the system involves taking out a promissory note that can only be repaid by
future research.
 4  In his own discussion, Barsalou uses the term  productivity  somewhat differendy, referring
to the ability of subjects to supply instantiations by filling in schemas that were created
by filtering out features of the initial perceptual situation. In his treatment o f this filling-
in Barsalou allows for supplying features that were not part o f the initial perception, thus
allowing for novelty, including novel representations that violate physical principles.
Thus, what he terms productivity is one way o f generating new representations, but
clearly not the only one present in his account of perceptual symbols.
 References
 Barsalou, L, 1999: Perceptual symbol systems.  Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 22, 577-609.
Batista, A. P., Buneo, C. A., Snyder, L. H ., and Andersen, R. A. 1999: Reach plans in eye-
centered coordinates.  Science , 285, 257-60.
 Bechtel, W.  1998: Representations and cognitive explanations: Assessing the dynamicist’s
challenge in cognitive science.  Cognitive Science,  22, 295-318.


<!-- Page 17 -->

Clark, A., and Toribio, J. 1994: Doing without representing?  Synthese,  101, 401-31.
 Corbetta, M ., Miezin, F. M ., Shulman, G. L., and Petersen, S. E. 1993: A P E T study of
visuospatial attention.  Journal of  Neuroscience,  13 (3), 1202-26.
 Cummins, R. 1996:  Representations, Targets, and Attitudes.  Cambridge, MA: M IT Press.
 Dretske,  E  I.  1981:  Knowledge and the Flow of Information.  Cambridge,  MA:  M IT
Press/Bradford Books.
 Fodor, J. A. 1975:  The Language of Thought.  New York: Crowell.
 Fodor, J.  A.  1987:  Psychosemantics: The Problem of Meaning in the Philosophy o f Mind.
 Cambridge, MA: M IT Press.
 Fodor, J. A., and Pylyshyn, Z. W. 1988: Connectionism and cognitive architecture: A critical
analysis.  Cognition,  28, 3-71.
 Goldman-Rakic,  P.  S.  1987:  Circuitry  o f  primate  prefrontal  cortex  and  regulation  of
behavior by representational memory. In J. M . Brookhart, V. B. Mountcastle, and S. R.
Geiger  (eds),  Handbook of Physiology:  The Nervous System,  vol.  5.  Bethesda,  M D:
American Physiological Society, 373— 417.
 Griffiths, P. E. 1997:  What Emotions Really Are.  Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
 Haselager, W. F. G., and de Groot, A. D. (forthcoming): Representationalism versus anti-
representationalism: a debate for the sake o f appearance?
 Hubei, D. H., and Wiesel, T. N. 1962: Receptive fields, binocular interaction and functional
architecture in the cat’s visual cortex.  Journal of  Physiology (London),  160, 106-54.
 Hubei, D. H ., and Wiesel, T. N. 1968: Receptive fields and functional architecture o f monkey
striate cortex.  Journal of  Physiology (London),  195, 2 1 5 4 3 .
 Kuffler, S. W. 1953: Discharge patterns and functional organization o f mammalian retina.
 Journal of  Neurophysiology,  16, 37-68.
 Langacker, R.  1987:  Foundations Of Cognitive Grammar,  Vol.  1. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.
 Mandik, P. 1999: Qualia, space, and control.  Philosophical Psychology,  12, 47-60.
 Millikan, R. G. 1984:  Language, Thought, and Other Biological Categories.  Cambridge, MA:
M IT Press.
 Penfield, W., and Rasmussen, T. 1950:  The Cerebral Cortex in Man: A Clinical  Study of  Local
ization of  Function.  New York: Macmillan.
 Snyder, L. H ., Batista, A. P., and Andersen, R. A. 1997: Coding o f intention in the posterior
parietal cortex.  Nature,  386, 167-70.
 Talbot, S. A., and Marshall, W. H. 1941: Physiological studies on neural mechanisms o f visual
localization and discrimination.  American  Journal of Ophthalmology),  24, 1255-63.
 van Gelder, T. 1995: W hat might cognition be, if not computation.  Journal of  Philosophy,  92,
345-81.
 348  Representation