# 4a - Bechtel - (2004) The Epistemology of Evidence in Cognitive Neuroscience

<!-- Page 1 -->

To appear in In R. Skipper Jr., C. Allen, R. A. Ankeny, C. F. Craver, L. Darden, G. Mikkelson, and R. Richardson (eds.),
 Philosophy and the Life Sciences: A Reader . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
 The Epistemology of Evidence in Cognitive Neuroscience
1
 William Bechtel
Department of Philosophy and Science Studies
University of California, San Diego
 1. The Epistemology of Evidence
 It is no secret that scientists argue. They argue about theories. But even more, they argue about
the evidence for theories. Is the evidence itself trustworthy? This is a bit surprising from the
perspective of traditional empiricist accounts of scientific methodology according to which the
evidence for scientific theories stems from observation, especially observation with the naked
eye. These accounts portray the testing of scientific theories as a matter of comparing the
predictions of the theory with the data generated by these observations, which are taken to
provide an objective link to reality.
One lesson philosophers of science have learned in the last 40 years is that even observation with
the naked eye is not as epistemically straightforward as was once assumed. What one is able to
see depends upon one’s training: a novice looking through a microscope may fail to recognize
the neuron and its processes (Hanson, 1958; Kuhn, 1962/1970).
2
But a second lesson is only
beginning to be appreciated: evidence in science is often not procured through simple
observations with the naked eye, but observations mediated by complex instruments and
sophisticated research techniques. What is most important, epistemically, about these techniques
is that they often radically alter the phenomena under investigation. Moreover, the exact nature
of this alteration is frequently poorly understood. Golgi staining is an extreme, but illustrative
example—100 years after the introduction by Camillo Golgi of the silver nitrate stain, we still do
not understand why it binds to only a few neurons in a preparation, which is the very feature
which has made it so useful in neuroanatomy. The fact that evidence is generated from altered
phenomena, where the nature of the alternations is often not well understood, raises a serious
question: to what degree is what is taken as evidence just the product of the alteration or in what
respects does it reflect the original phenomena for which it is taken to be evidence? When
scientists raise the objection that purported evidence is an artifact, they are claiming that it does
not reflect the original phenomena in the intended manner but rather is a product of the mode of
intervention.
1  I thank Cory Wright and Carl Craver for their very helpful comments on earlier drafts of this paper.
2
The idea that perception, the recognition of objects and events, is indirect and rests on “unconscious inferences,”
was clearly articulated in the 19th century by Helmholtz. A number of perceptual theorists (for example, James
Gibson) have taken issue with the reference to “inferences” in perception, but the development of a neurobiological
understanding of how the visual system operates clearly supports the idea that there are many processing steps
between the registration of light on the retina and the recognition of the object or events seen. Accordingly, many of
the same issues that arise in evaluating instruments arise in perception itself. I have argued elsewhere (Bechtel,
2000) for parallels between the way we settle the occasional but rare disputes about what is visually perceived and
the disputes between scientists over whether an instrument has generated an artifact.


<!-- Page 2 -->

Bechtel: The Epistemology of Evidence in Cognitive Neuroscience  p.  2
One reason philosophers, until recently, have not attended to the epistemic issues surrounding
evidence is that they have focused on relatively established sciences. By the time scientific
theories are encoded in textbooks, the controversies about the evidence adduced for them have
generally been resolved and the techniques and methods have come to be treated as “black
boxes” (Latour, 1987). (This does not mean that the investigators have a clear understanding of
how interventions serve procure the evidence, as the case of the Golgi stain makes clear.) To
appreciate the contentious nature of evidence, it is best to focus on the period when new
techniques are first introduced. At this stage, charges of artifact and reasons for suspecting
artifacts appear frequently in the scientific literature, as do defenses against these charges.
The worries about artifacts point to a new problem area for epistemology that I refer to as the
 epistemology of evidence . The challenge for the epistemology of evidence is to understand how
the instruments and techniques for producing new evidence are themselves evaluated. If
researchers had independent evidence about how the techniques worked, then we would have a
regress, but the procedure of epistemically evaluating evidence would be comparable to that of
evaluating theories. As already noted, that is generally not the case. Researchers regularly
introduce and rely on new instruments and techniques well before there is a theoretical
understanding of how they work.
To what do researchers look to evaluate whether their evidence is reliable if not an understanding
of how the evidence is generated by the instruments and procedures? The somewhat surprising
answer is: to the evidence itself. In general, there are three factors they focus on: (1) whether the
instrument or technique is producing repeatable and well-defined results that exhibit a definite
pattern, (2) the degree to which the results from one instrument or technique agree with results
generated with other techniques or instruments, and (3) the degree to which the purported
evidence coheres with theories that are taken to be plausible (Bechtel, 1995, 2000).
Discussions of scientific methodology often emphasize the importance of agreement of the
evidence produced through use of one instrument and technique with that generated by other,
generally already established, techniques. But there are two reasons to be suspicious as to
whether this requirement plays as central a role as is sometimes suggested. First, the main
interest in new instruments and techniques is that they produce evidence not obtained by other
methods. In just these areas of greatest interest, one cannot invoke agreement with other already
accepted methodologies. Hence, at most the comparison with results of existing techniques
represents a minimal check on the reliability of the new technique. Second, relating the evidence
generated with one instrument or technique to that produced by another is frequently not
straightforward but depends upon a complex set of inferences. Researchers have to develop ways
to bridge between techniques, often by modifying the new technique until it produces results
appropriately aligned with the older technique.
The fact that researchers have to work to bring a new technique into correspondence with results
from applying more established techniques points to a different way to understand the attempt to
relate new techniques with older ones—it serves as a means of calibrating the new technique. I
will illustrate this in what follows. But beyond mere calibration, there is another important
consideration about the use of multiple techniques. Frequently, no one technique is able to


<!-- Page 3 -->

Bechtel: The Epistemology of Evidence in Cognitive Neuroscience  p.  3
answer the questions researchers ask and evidence must be acquired by piecing together results
obtained by different techniques (Bechtel, 2002a). This too will be illustrated below.
I will develop this analysis of the epistemology of evidence by focusing on three of the most
important sources of evidence employed in cognitive neuroscience—lesion, single-cell
recording, and neuroimaging studies. The techniques and instruments discussed here are all
designed to reveal the operation of mechanisms. A mechanism, as I used the term, is a system
whose behavior produces a phenomenon in virtue of organized component parts performing
coordinated component operations. A brain mechanism, for example, might be involved in
analyzing what object or event is seen or in encoding information into long-term memory. The
component parts will be different brain regions (systems of neurons) which carry out specific
information processing operations (e.g., analyzing an object’s shape). These components are
typically spatially and temporally organized so as to coordinate the operation of the parts to
produce the cognitive phenomenon in question (Bechtel & Richardson, 1993; Bechtel &
Abrahamsen, under review; Bechtel, in press; Glennan, 1996, 2002; Machamer, Darden, &
Craver, 2000).
At the core of understanding how a mechanism produces a given behavior is a decomposition of
the mechanism. There are two quite different ways of decomposing a mechanism—functionally
into component operations and structurally into component parts.  Localization , as I use the term,
refers to linking a component operation with a component part. It is important to emphasize what
is being localized. It is not the overall cognitive performance, but the operations in terms of
which the performance is to be explained. In the context of neuroimaging, Petersen and Fiez
emphasize this point when they distinguish  elementary operations  from  tasks  and argue that
operations, but not tasks, are likely to be localized in the brain:
“. . . elementary operations, defined on the basis of information processing
analyses of task performance, are localized in different regions of the brain.
Because many such elementary operations are involved in any cognitive task, a
set of distributed functional areas must be orchestrated in the performance of even
simple cognitive tasks. . . . A functional area of the brain is not a task area: there
is no “tennis forehand area” to be discovered. Likewise, no area of the brain is
devoted to a very complex function; “attention” or “language” is not localized in a
particular Brodmann area or lobe. Any task or “function” utilizes a complex and
distributed set of brain areas” (Petersen & Fiez, 1993, p. 513).
Historically, however, research directed at discovering a mechanism often begins by
localizing whole tasks or cognitive phenomena in one component of a system (localizing
an area for articulate speech, as discussed below). Such efforts, while not generating an
understanding of how the component parts perform operations that together realize the
activity of the mechanism, often play an important heuristic role. When, for example,
subsequent research points to additional areas involved in performing the activity, then
researchers begin to consider proposals for decomposing the task into simpler operations
that then are coordinated into the performance of the overall task (Bechtel & Richardson,
1993).


<!-- Page 4 -->

Bechtel: The Epistemology of Evidence in Cognitive Neuroscience  p.  4
Crucial to understanding a mechanism is figuring out what operations its components are
performing. This typically requires some form of intervention and a means of detecting the
effects of the intervention. The techniques discussed below differ in where the intervention
occurs and where the effects are detected (Craver, 2002). Lesion studies intervene within the
system, disabling a component of the system, and typically detect the effects in terms of changes
in the overall activity of the system.
3
Both single-cell recording and neuroimaging, on the other
hand, intervene on the stimulus presented to the system and detect the effect on components
within the system (see Figure 1). In addition to figuring out what operations the components are
performing, understanding a mechanism also requires determining how the components are
organized. Although the experimental techniques discussed here can give suggestions as to the
organization of the components, modeling, including mathematical and computational modeling,
are often the best tools for evaluating hypotheses about organization.
 Figure 1. The locus of intervention and detection in (a) single-cell recording and neuroimaging studies and (b)
lesion studies.
 Before turning to the specific instruments and techniques of cognitive neuroscience, there is one
additional general issue that should be noted. In trying to understand cognitive functions in the
brain, neuroscientists perform research on a variety of species (Schaffner, 2001, reprinted in this
volume). Sometimes the decision to work with a given species is driven by ethical considerations
(invasive studies with humans and increasingly with higher primates, unless motivated by
therapeutic needs, are deemed morally unacceptable). Other times considerations of the ease of
working with an organism or the ability to secure reasonably clean data drive the decision. But
the fact that different species are employed means that correspondences must be established
between the brains of members of different species (or between brains of different members of a
species as differences are encountered there as well). Often these correspondences can only be
established indirectly in terms of the common pattern of results. For example, one way to
3  An approach not further discussed in this paper that has on occasion been influential in determining how the brain
works is to stimulate a component and detect its effect on the overall behavior of the system. An elegant example of
the use of stimulation is found in the work of William Newsome (Newsome, Britten, & Movshon, 1989). In a
context of an ambiguous stimulus, microstimulation of cells in MT influenced the monkey’s judgment about the
direction of movement in the stimulus pattern. In this approach, as in lesion research, the intervention is within the
system and detection occurs at the level of the behavior of the whole system.


<!-- Page 5 -->

Bechtel: The Epistemology of Evidence in Cognitive Neuroscience  p.  5
identify human analogues of brain areas found in monkey studies is to find in neuroimaging
areas that respond to the same type of stimulus for which responses are found through single-cell
recording in the monkey. Although there is not space here to analyze them, such modes of
calibration between species raise additional epistemic issues about the evidence employed in
cognitive neuroscience.
 2. Deficits and Lesions
 One of the oldest approaches to identifying the function of brain regions is analysis of the
deficits resulting from lesions (localized damage) to those regions. Lesions can originate either
from illness or injury or from interventions by neuroscientists that actually destroy neural tissue.
4
(The use of naturally occurring lesions is closely associated with the subfield of
neuropsychology.) Whatever the source of the lesion, the goal of this approach is to identify a
psychological deficit associated with it and to infer from that deficit what contribution the
damaged area made to normal psychological activity. This is an extremely difficult inferential
task, as we shall see (see also Glymour, 1994, reprinted in this volume).
The classical example of using a naturally occurring lesion to make inferences about operations
in the normal human brain was Paul Broca’s study of a patient named LeBorgne. When Broca,
already a highly regarded surgeon and founder of the Société d’Anthropoligie, first encountered
LeBorgne in April 1861, he had been hospitalized for 20 years. His initial complaint was a loss
of the ability to speak, although he retained the ability to make oral sounds. Among the few
words he could utter was  Tan , which became the name by which he is often known.
Subsequently, LeBorgne lost sensitivity on the right side of his body and developed paralysis.
Finally, gangrene developed in his paralyzed right leg, the complaint for which Broca was
brought in.
By the time Broca encountered LeBorgne a number of researchers had proposed that areas in the
frontal lobe of the brain were involved in speech and language. Several decades earlier the
phrenologist Franz Joseph Gall had proposed a frontal localization of speech, but his evidence,
correlating cranial shape with the degree of development of a trait, was widely regarded as
suspect by serious scientists, and his resulting maps of the brain were dismissed as artifacts.
5
Subsequently Jean-Baptiste Bouillaud argued on the basis of anatomical data from a number of
patients that speech was a frontal lobe function. Bouillaud was a highly regarded physician
4  Such deliberately destructive studies are not permitted on human subjects except when intended as therapy. For
example, physicians may excise brain tissue to remove tumors or to stop epileptic seizures. Typically, they will only
excise tissue not thought to be playing critical cognitive roles. But often the appraisal that a brain region is not
performing a critical task is due to current ignorance. One of the best known subjects of cognitive neuroscience
research is a patient known as HM. William Scoville removed major portions of his medial temporal lobe in a
successful attempt to relieve intractable epilepsy. Tragically, HM was no longer able to remember any events
occurring in his life after the surgery or for several years before (Scoville, 1968). His deficit resulted in a multi-
decade attempt to understand the contribution of the medial temporal lobe, including the hippocampus, to memory
encoding.
5  Despite his bad reputation, Gall was a very skilled neuroanatomist. Moreover, his underlying idea of correlating an
activity with a feature of a brain that is engaged in performing that activity is fundamentally the same as the
techniques now used in cognitive neuroscience. For further discussion, see Zawidzki and Bechtel (2004).


<!-- Page 6 -->

Bechtel: The Epistemology of Evidence in Cognitive Neuroscience  p.  6
(Dean of the Faculty of Medicine in Paris and President of the Académie de Médecine), but
despite his general reputation, his claim to localize speech was regarded as suspect (his case was
undoubtedly hurt by his reputation as an enthusiast of Gall). In addition to a general prejudice
against localization in the wake of Gall, there was a conviction, stemming from Descartes, that
the mind was a unity so that even if the mind was associated with the brain, it was not broken
into different faculties localized in different brain areas. These doubts were buttressed by
empirical evidence from other researchers who identified patients with frontal damage that did
not show speech deficits and patients with speech deficits but no frontal lobe damage. Lacking
even a reliable pattern, prior to Broca’s work, claims to the localization of language ability were
generally dismissed.
Days before Broca encountered LeBorgne, Simon Alexandre Ernest Aubertin, Bouillaud’s son-
in-law, had defended the frontal hypothesis for speech at a meeting of the Société
d’Anthropoligie and had been severely criticized by Pierre Gratiolet. Broca was himself attracted
to the hypothesis of a frontal area responsible for speech, and proposed on encountering
LeBorgne to treat him as a critical test of the hypothesis. After LeBorgne died a week later,
Broca performed an autopsy that revealed a massive lesion centered on the third frontal
convolution of the left hemisphere. Broca maintained that when LeBorgne’s deficits were limited
to the inability to speak, the damage was limited to this central area. Broca went on to contend
that this region was the locus of articulate speech (Broca, 1861).
Broca subsequently marshalled evidence from a number of other patients to support his claim,
and refined it to hold that control of speech was typically localized in the left frontal cortex.
6
These additional patients, together with those identified by Bouillaud, produced a definite pattern
of results, suggesting that they were not just artifacts. However, the pattern was not perfect as
there continued to be reports of patients with speech deficits without frontal lesions and patients
with frontal lesions without speech deficits. Over time the plausibility of the assignment of
articulate speech, or of some information processing operation related to speech, to this area,
which came to be known as  Broca’s area , increased, in part due to its close proximity to areas
identified as controlling motor activities involved in articulation.  The deficit from a lesion in
Broca’s area also came to be woven into a broader account. A decade after Broca’s work, Carl
Wernicke (1874) described a different pattern of language deficit, one apparently affecting
comprehension of language following lesions in a part of the temporal cortex known as
 Wernicke’s area . He proposed various networks that linked his, Broca’s, and other areas so as to
perform various linguistic tasks.
The first half of the 20
th
century was dominated by skepticism about localization claims and
investigators focused on the integration of the whole mind (a view ensconced in Karl Lashley’s
(Lashley, 1950) designation of most areas of cortex as  association areas . The tradition of Broca
and Wernicke, however, was revived in the 1950s by Norman Geschwind (1979). He advanced a
model of reading aloud in which the visual areas at the back of the brain first process incoming
information and pass the results to Wernicke’s area where comprehension occurs. Information
6  For an account of Broca and the links between his work and Bouillaud, Aubertin, and Gustave and Marc Dax, see
(Finger, 2000, chapter 10).


<!-- Page 7 -->

Bechtel: The Epistemology of Evidence in Cognitive Neuroscience  p.  7
encoding the comprehended text is then sent to Broca’s area, where speech is planned. Finally,
information is sent to the adjacent motor areas that direct the actual production of speech. In the
decades since the specific assignments of information processing operations to these areas has
been repeatedly challenged (but not the claim that they perform operations related to language)
and additional areas have been identified that figure in language processing (Bates, 1994). The
conception of language processing as involving a (quite large) number of brain areas performing
different operations is now quite well established, with most of the evidence coming from
analysis of patients with lesions (Bechtel, 2001b).
Lesion studies have provided a principal avenue for understanding brain operations in both
neuropsychology and behavioral neuroscience, especially in the period from 1950 to 1970. They
were nearly the only kind of study of neural process one could carry out onhumans. The
approach extended far beyond deficits of language (aphasias, apraxias), providing important
clues to other cognitive phenomena such as perception and memory. For example, the inability
of patients who could otherwise see to recognize an object or identify its functional significance
(a condition known as  visual agnosia ) revealed the importance of areas in the temporal lobe in
recognizing and categorizing what a person is seeing (see Farah, 1990, for a detailed review).
Likewise, the variety of memory deficits found in amnesic patients led to the differentiation of
different types of memory processing (see Squire, 1987, for a detailed review). These
investigations of deficits in human patients were often coupled with lesion studies in other
species, where the lesions can be experimentally induced. Accordingly, lesions in the temporal
lobe were found to induce visual agnosia in monkeys (Mishkin & Pribram, 1954; Mishkin, 1966)
while hippocampal lesions were found to produce deficits in spatial memory in rats (O'Keefe &
Nadel, 1978).
Lesion research raises a number of epistemic challenges. One is determining precisely what areas
of the brain are injured. Until the recent introduction of imagining technology, researchers could
only determine what areas in the human brain were damaged after the person died and an
autopsy was performed. By then, though, the range of damage may have extended. Such was the
case with Leborgne, requiring Broca (1861), for example, to engage in protracted argument as to
where in that area the deficit was localized when Leborgne’s deficit involved only loss of
articulate speech. Even with techniques for structural neuroimaging, there is still uncertainty
about precisely what brain region was destroyed since brain areas do not have well delineated
boundaries (Mundale, 1998). (An alternative approach to generating lesions, using chemical
toxins or inhibitors, overcomes this problem. For example, tetrodotoxin (TTX) and lidocaine
specifically target sodium channels and the effects are reversible, allowing researchers much
more precise control over the lesions produced, but still faces the challenges that follow. The
choice between various techniques designed to achieve similar results is itself a rich topic for the
philosophy of experimentation.)
Perhaps the greatest epistemic challenge in using lesions and deficits to understand brain
operation is to infer precisely what the damaged component had contributed to normal function.
The most general inference is that the damaged area was in some way necessary to the normal
performance (e.g., inferring from the fact that lesioning the hippocampus or hippocampal region
results in anterograde amnesia of semantic memories, to the conclusion that it is necessary for


<!-- Page 8 -->

Bechtel: The Epistemology of Evidence in Cognitive Neuroscience  p.  8
encoding new semantic memories). But a component operation may be important without being
necessary. For example, the brain, like most biological systems, may exhibit redundancy, so that
even when a component fails to perform its operation, another component performs the same or
sufficiently similar operation that no overall deficit results. Or the brain may reorganize so that
another component alters its operation to make up for the deficit. The brain is a constantly
adapting structure in which, once an area is removed, processing in other areas is also altered.
Redundancy and reorganization undercut interpreting lesion experiments as demonstrating the
necessity of a component or its operation to normal performance.
7
Typically, however, the goal is not just to learn that a region was necessary for a function, but to
ascertain what it contributed to the performance of the function—that is, what elementary
operation it performed. This is extremely challenging. You can gain an appreciation of the
challenge involved by considering how you might go about trying to understand how a radio (or
a computer) operates by selectively removing parts and examining the resulting performance. As
Richard Gregory (1968) notes, removal of a transistor from a radio may cause it to hum, yet it
would be a bad inference to assume that the removed transistor was the hum suppressor. To
begin to identify the operations that the damaged part actually performs you must shift focus
from the deficits manifested in the damaged system to the activity performed by the normal
system and the component operations that figure in that activity. In the case of products like
radios, engineers designed the mechanisms from knowledge of what operations components
could perform. With natural systems, however, this perspective of the engineer is not available,
and researchers must hypothesize what operations might figure in the performance of the overall
task.
One strategy that is widely invoked in lesion research is to attempt to dissociate two mental
activities by showing that damage to a given brain part may interfere with one but not another. If
the two activities differ in that one requires an elementary operation that the other does not, then
it seems plausible to infer that the damaged locus performed that elementary operation. Single
dissociations, however, do not show that the damaged brain part is only involved in the impaired
activity, since it could be that the two activities differ in the demands they make on a component
and that increased damage to the same brain part might interfere with both activities. As a result,
researchers often seek double-dissociations, where damage to one area causes disruption in one
activity (while leaving the other largely unaffected), and damage to another area disrupts the
other activity (while leaving the first largely unimpaired). Double dissociations are often taken as
compelling evidence that the two activities are performed separately in the brain (Shallice,
1988).
In fact, however, double dissociations can arise even if the two activities share a number of
component operations. The discovery of a double dissociation encourages researchers to think
7
A recently developed technique provides a strategy both for controlling more precisely the site of a lesion and
preventing reorganization of processing after the lesion. This involves inducing temporary lesions through
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS); it involves application of a strong but localized magnetic field at the scalp
so as to disrupt the activity in the immediately underlying brain regions. Early reports (Walsh & Cowey, 1998)
indicate that one can disrupt very specific functions. If so, it will allow researchers to set side these worries and
focus more directly on the question of what the affected area contributed to normal function.


<!-- Page 9 -->

Bechtel: The Epistemology of Evidence in Cognitive Neuroscience  p.  9
comparatively about the two activities, asking what operations they might utilize in common and
what different operations each requires. Such a strategy is a productive way to generate a
decomposition of a task into more basic operations. Lesions disabling one of these operations
and therefore the task that depends upon it can then explain the double dissociation.
8
A fundamental challenge for researchers is that elementary operations do not simply present
themselves to researchers but must be inferred. In a passage that harkens back to Petersen and
Fiez’s distinction between tasks and elementary operations, Feinberg and Farah characterize
neuropsychology as turning to cognitive psychology to move beyond localizing tasks to focusing
on the component operations (processes) underlying these tasks:
Traditionally, neuropsychologists studied the localization and functional
organization of  abilities , such as speech, reading, memory, object recognition, and
so forth. But few would doubt that each of these abilities depends upon an
orchestrated set of  component cognitive processes , and it seems more likely that
the underlying cognitive components, rather than the task-defined abilities, are
what is implemented in localized neural tissue. The theories of cognitive
psychology therefore allowed neuropsychologists to pose questions about the
localization and organization of the components of the cognitive architecture, a
level of theoretical analysis that was more likely to yield clear and generalizable
findings (Feinberg & Farah, 2000, p. 16).
At the core of cognitive psychology is the conception of the mind an information processing
system—a machine that through a series of operations transforms information. It thus could offer
neuropsychology insight into component operations.
The benefits of interaction between neuropsychology and cognitive psychology went in both
directions. Cognitive psychologists had to rely on hypothesizing component information
processing operations that could account for performance (or sometimes draw on insights of
researchers in artificial intelligence, who adopt an engineer’s perspective in trying to conceive
how to build up from simpler processes to performing an overall operation). Their ability to test
these hypotheses was typically limited to such measures as error patterns or differences in
reaction times between tasks thought to differ in single component operations. Lesion results
provide a different means to test hypotheses about component operations, one that relies on
different (albeit it potentially problematic) assumptions. If results of independent techniques do
concur, that is one way to counter worries that either represents merely an artifact.
8
Recent investigations with neural networks and other dynamical systems have shown that double dissociations can
result form differentially damaging single network systems which do not employ different subsystems for
performing different tasks (e.g., applying rules for pronouncing words versus looking up pronunciations in a
lexicon—see (Hinton & Shallice, 1991; van Orden, Pennington, & Stone, 2001). Although such results seem to
count against the claim that double-dissociations are evidence for separate systems being responsible for separately
impaired activities, they are compatible with the strategy just outlined of focusing on what elementary operations
figure differentially in the two tasks. The double-dissociations in these networks are generated by lesioning different
parts of these networks, and it is plausible to construe these parts of the networks as responsible for different
elementary operations. Moreover, even if sometimes double dissociations are not due to separate components, that
does not negate the usefulness of looking for double dissociations. All research techniques are fallible, and the most
one can demand is that they are probative


<!-- Page 10 -->

Bechtel: The Epistemology of Evidence in Cognitive Neuroscience  p.  10
Even if one knows what the basic information processing operations involved in performing a
cognitive task are, it remains a challenge to link a given operation to a brain region relying only
on lesions. I already noted above the problems created by redundancy and reorganization. Even
when these are overcome, the linkage between lesion and normal operations can be complex. A
lesion may interrupt an operation by removing the part that performed it, but it may also interrupt
it more indirectly by removing inputs to the responsible region or critical modulatory feedback to
the responsible region. It may also create a deficit in an even more indirect manner such as by
occluding blood flow to other regions or creating swelling that affects operations performed in
other regions. Lesion studies themselves provide no way to resolve these worries and determine
what operation the lesioned component performed in the normal organism. One way to address
these worries is to try to correlate activity in a region in a normal system with the tasks being
performed. This is the strategy of the next two techniques I will consider.
 3. Single-Cell Recording
 The discovery of the nature of electricity and that the brain in part operates on electrical
principles (proposed by Luigi Galvani in the 18
th
century and definitively established by Emil du
Bois-Reymond in the mid-19
th
century) enabled neuroscientists to study the brain in the same
way investigators study other electrical systems. These include applying electrical stimuli to
intervene in its operation or recording its electrical activity. Of these, the more probative
approach for studying cognitive operations has been to record electrical activity as the brain is
engaged in its different functions. Two different ways of recording electrical activity have played
major roles in cognitive neuroscience. One involves recording from electrodes placed on the
scalp that pick up aggregate electrical currents.
9
These currents originate primarily from
pyramidal cells that are aligned in columns in the cortex; stimulation of these cells produces ion
flows into and out of the cell. When the cells are aligned spatially and activated synchronously,
these ion flows create an electric field strong enough to be recorded at the scalp (Kutas & Dale,
1997). Recordings of these fields constitute an electroencephalogram (EEG). EEGs have been
employed for such purposes as studying sleep-awake cycles and detecting the origins of epileptic
tumors. To link the EEG to mental processing requires further analysis. One step is to relate the
EEG response in time to the presentation of a given stimulus. Another is to sum the response
over numerous trials to average out background information. This generates another measure
(the evoked response potential or ERP), which has been very useful in fixing the temporal
pattern of neural processing (e.g., determining when attentional processes affect information
processing-see Luck & Ford, 1998). By comparing the temporal responses to different stimuli or
in different task situations, researchers gain important clues as to the mental operations that are
differentially invoked. A limitation of ERP research, however, is that it is extremely difficult to
determine the spatial origin in the brain of the ERP signal recorded on the skull. For this reason,
9  Hans Berger, a German psychiatrist, developed the technique for recording such signals by modifying procedures
designed to record the much stronger electrical signal from heart muscle. The signals reflect an aggregate of neural
activity. Berger distinguished several different patterns of waves, including what he called  alpha waves  (large-
amplitude, low-frequency waves which appeared when participants closed their eyes) and  beta waves  (smaller,
higher-frequency waves, which appeared as soon as the subject received sensory stimuli or was asked to solve a
problem (Berger, 1929)


<!-- Page 11 -->

Bechtel: The Epistemology of Evidence in Cognitive Neuroscience  p.  11
cognitive neuroscientists are increasingly using ERP studies together with functional
neuroimaging techniques discussed in section 4.
The alternative approach to recording electrical activity in the brain is to record from individual
neurons, either by inserting an electrode into the neuron or by placing it next to the neuron.
Although the procedures for doing this are now routine, they were challenging to work out. One
problem stemmed from the weakness of the electrical signal. The combined effort of numerous
investigators was required to develop instruments capable of amplifying the signal sufficiently to
detect it. By 1925, though, Edgar Adrian at Cambridge was able to record from a nerve in a
suspended frog leg.
10
His results, however, were highly irregular, initially suggesting an artifact
stemming from the recording equipment.
11
Even more puzzling was that when he laid the leg
flat, the signal ceased. That anomaly was also a clue—when the muscle was suspended it was
stretched, and he proposed that sensory nerves responded to the degree of stretch. He further
inferred that the small oscillations he saw represented action potentials, possibly arising from
single nerve fibers. This pointed to the prospect of recording from a single nerve fiber, and
Adrian set that as an objective in the last sentence of his paper from the 1925 experiment: “More
detailed analysis of these results is postponed until experiments have been made on preparations
containing a known number of sensory endings, if possible only one” (Adrian, 1926, p. 72). With
Yngve Zotterman he pursued a strategy of slicing off spindles of a muscle connected to a nerve
fiber until only one remained, revealing the individual action potentials traveling on that nerve.
The pattern of action potentials, all of the same magnitude traveling at the same speed,
confirmed what until then had only been determined indirectly—that action potentials were not
graded but all-or-none (Adrian & Zotterman, 1926).
The pattern of firing was not only regular, fitting the first criterion for being reliable evidence,
but fit a plausible theoretical perspective, the third criterion. Moreover, with increased weight
placed on the suspended muscle, the rate of firing increased, suggesting that the nerve encoded
information through firing rates. This further articulated a plausible framework in which to
interpret the results. Adrian and Zotterman (1926) also found that the nerve fired most when a
new weight was presented, and then diminished, demonstrating that the nerve encoded changes
in stimulus, not the absolute value of the stimulus. Subsequently, with Detlev Bronk, Adrian
developed procedures for removing all but two or three axons to a muscle in a rabbit and
recording from electrodes placed on the fragment (Adrian & Bronk, 1928, 1929). This enabled
recording the action potentials sent to control the nerve. Adrian and Bronk also attached
loudspeakers to their amplifiers, allowing them to listen to clicks as well as observe them on an
oscilloscope.
With these tools, Adrian and numerous other investigators began to map areas of the brain where
neural responses could be elicited either as the animal moved or as its body was stimulated.
Lesion studies already provided information about the primary cortical projection areas for
different areas of the animal’s body, but Adrian’s work initially generated a surprising result: he
10  For an account of Adrian’s research, and how it drew on others such as Joseph Erlanger and Herbert Gasser, see
Finger (2000, chapter 15)
11  I noted above that definite results were a sign of reliable evidence. Irregular results, accordingly, suggest an
artifact.


<!-- Page 12 -->

Bechtel: The Epistemology of Evidence in Cognitive Neuroscience  p.  12
found a second projection zone for a cat’s paw. With these tools for recording from single cells,
other researchers found additional instances of multiple projections from the senses to cortex and
multiple projection areas soon became the norm. Such findings, however, generated a new
question—just what is being represented in these different cortical areas? Answering this
question required more than just correlating stimulation of an area of the animal’s body with a
response; it required a detailed model of information processing.
Single cell recording has been used most effectively in decomposing the information processing
tasks performed by the visual system. As with Adrian’s work, the first application was largely to
confirm results that had already been obtained from lesion results—the existence of a topological
map of the visual field in the primary visual cortex (Talbot & Marshall, 1941). Single-cell
recording, however, enabled researchers to do something that was not possible with lesion
studies—determine the expanse of the visual field to which a single cell would respond. Haldan
Keffer Hartline (1938) introduced the phrase  receptive field  for this area. One could also
determine more specifically the type of stimulus to which a given cell would respond. Stephen
Kuffler (1953) pioneered this inquiry by recording from retinal ganglion cells and cells in the
lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) of the thalamus (a brain region that acts as a gateway for most
incoming sensory information). He found that these responded most strongly when a stimulus
was presented at the center of the receptive field and not in the surround (on-center, off-
surround) or vice versa (off-center, on-surround). The determinateness of this pattern was an
important indicator that the results were not artifacts but genuine indicators of the information
the cells were carrying. It was easy to propose advantages to having cells respond to a difference
between center and surround (e.g., it would enable an organism to detect the boundaries of
objects), thereby embedding the result in a plausible theoretical perspective.
Over the half-century since Kuffler’s pioneering research, single-cell recording has provided a
great deal of information about the response properties of individual cells and supported
inferences as to how cells in a pathway process information from earlier cells. In one of the
papers in neuroscience most cited by philosophers “What the frog’s eye tells the frog’s brain,”
Jerome Lettvin and his colleagues identified retinal ganglion cells which responded to specific
stimuli, including some that responded to small moving spots that the researchers characterized
as bug detectors (Lettvin, Maturana, McCulloch, & Pitts, 1959). The ecological analysis that
frogs needed to be sensitive to bugs in order to catch and consume them enhanced the
plausibility of the claim that these cells were tuned to moving spots.
Even more important for developing an information processing account of visual processing was
Hubel and Wiesel’s (1962; 1965; 1968) use of single-cell recording to map out the response
characteristics of cells in primary visual cortex. Their initial assumption was that cortical cells
would respond to spots of light as Kuffler had indicated for retinal and LGN cells, but their quest
to find such cells was fruitless, as no cells produced a clear pattern of results. After long,
frustrating investigations, an accident provided a clue. Hubel was changing the slide in the
project when it stuck, casting a bar rather than a spot of light. This elicited a strong response
from the cell from which they were recording, which had previously been quiescent. (Hubel,
1982) After this fortuitous finding, they began to test bars of light and eventually determined that
some cells in primary visual cortex responded to specifically oriented bars of light or darkness at


<!-- Page 13 -->

Bechtel: The Epistemology of Evidence in Cognitive Neuroscience  p.  13
specific locations in their receptive field ( simple cells ) while others responded to specifically
oriented bars anywhere in their receptive field ( complex cells ). Importantly, they also proposed a
simple information-processing model of how simple cells could compute the presence of bars
from the firing pattern of multiple center-surround cells in the LGN and how complex cells could
recognize the presence of bars at different locations in their receptive fields from multiple simple
cells (see Figure 2).
 Figure 2. Hubel and Wiesel’s information processing proposals. In (a) simple cells identify a bar from the
output of center-surround cells in the LGN. The cell on the right serves as an and-gate, firing only if the four
cells shown on the left are all activated by the stimulus. In (b) complex cells identify bars anywhere in their
receptive fields. The cell on the left is an or-gate, firing if any of the simple cells on the left are activated by
simple cells on the left that respond to a vertical bar).
 Hubel and Wiesel’s work exemplifies how a new technique could provide totally unanticipated
information. Their results were also was quickly accepted. What made the evidence so
compelling? Of major importance was the regularity in the pattern of the data. Not only did they
identify cells responsive to bars of particular orientations, but they found a regular pattern to the
distribution of cells responsive to different orientations. Second, insofar as single-cell recording
confirmed the topological orientation of primary visual cortex, the data was consistent with that
generated from lesions studies, although it went far beyond it. Finally, with their information
processing ideas, Hubel and Wiesel provided a theoretical context in which their results could be
interpreted.
Over ensuing decades researchers have worked out the processing of different kinds of visual
information by cells in extrastriate and temporal cortex (for a contemporary account of the steps
in visual processing that has been produced primarily from single-cell recording, see van Essen
and Gallant (1994); for an historical overview, see Bechtel (2001a)). Similar research, beginning
with Clinton Wolsey (1960) has resulted in identification of different processing areas involved
in audition. Cell recording has also been used to identify cells engaged in tasks further removed
from the sensory and motor periphery; for example, Goldman-Rakic (1987) has identified cells
that continue to fire after a stimulus has been removed when the animal must retain that
information for a short interval before performing an action.
As useful a technique as cell recording is, it does confront limitations from the cognitive
neuroscientist’s perspective of trying to understand the overall operation of the mechanism


<!-- Page 14 -->

Bechtel: The Epistemology of Evidence in Cognitive Neuroscience  p.  14
responsible for specific cognitive activities. First, since the technique is primarily correlational, it
requires identifying a sensory stimulus, motor response, or ongoing cognitive activity to which
the neural activity can be correlated. This is most easily done close to the sensory and motor
periphery. It also depends on the luck and ingenuity of the experimenter (recall that it was the
sticking of a slide in the projector that led to Hubel and Wiesel’s breakthrough) in testing various
stimuli. Van Essen and Gallant (1994) show that many V4 cells surprisingly seem to prefer
irregular (non-Cartesian) shapes, which would not be natural candidates to test.
12
Second,
although when successful the technique allows researchers to identify what stimulus drives the
cell, it does not reveal what contribution the cell is making to processing that information. As
Marr (1982) argued, this requires an analysis of the task the cognitive system is performing and
accounts in terms of elementary operations of how it is carrying out that task. Knowing what
kind of stimulus different cells in a processing pathway are most responsive to can provide clues
as to what operation needs to be performed for the cells later in the pathway to compute their
responses from the responses of cells earlier in the pathway. Third, it assumes that electrical
responses of individual cells are the proper correlates of psychological function. Increasingly,
researchers are exploring the possibility that the proper correlate may be a pattern distributed
over many cells. Procedures for recording from many, possibly hundreds, of cells simultaneously
are now being developed, but these pose serious challenges in terms of analyzing the resulting
data. Finally, and from a cognitive perspective, a very serious worry is that ethical considerations
only permit single-cell recording in non-human species. This poses challenges for employing this
technique to study higher cognitive functions exhibited primarily in humans.
 4. Neuroimaging
 This brings us to one of the newest research techniques in the cognitive neuroscience arsenal, the
tool that arguably is responsible for the development of a special field of cognitive neuroscience.
It is also a technique that remains contentious.
13
The type of evidence neuroimaging provides is
of the same form as that generated by single-cell recording—activity in the brain that is
correlated with cognitive operations a person is performing. However, it has captured the public
attention in ways that single-cell recording never did. A major reason for this is that
neuroimaging is noninvasive and imaging can be done on normal humans while they are
engaging in cognitive tasks that are thought to be most distinctively human, including abstract
reasoning tasks or making ethical judgments. (The conditions for imaging are far from optimal—
laying on one’s back in a cylindrical tube that is making loud clanking noises. Thus, it is not
possible now to image people as they perform cognitive operations in the normal contexts of
their lives. This restricts the kind of cognitive tasks that can be imaged as well as raises worries
about whether people perform the tasks in the same way in the scanner as in real life—a concern
about the ecological validity of the studies.)
12  They also argue that cells give graded responses to stimuli and argue that researchers should not view them as
feature detectors but as filters.
13  For a recent extremely negative appraisal of neuroimaging based on analysis of how data is gathered as well as
more general doubts about whether cognitive abilities decompose into elementary operations, see Uttal (2001). I
discuss and evaluate Uttal’s objections in (Bechtel, 2002b).


<!-- Page 15 -->

Bechtel: The Epistemology of Evidence in Cognitive Neuroscience  p.  15
At the turn of the 20
th
century, X-rays revolutionized the medical sciences by providing non-
invasive images of bone structure. (Bones blocked the transmission of X-rays, resulting in light
images on photographic plates.) X-rays, however, could not provide information about brain
structures since brain tissue blocks the transmission of very view X-rays. Investigators interested
in anatomical structures in the brain therefore developed alternative techniques such as
computerized tomography (CT or CAT scans) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI); the latter,
in particular, provides high-resolution images of brain tissue.
Imaging operations (function) as opposed to parts (structure) requires recording a signal that is
related to the operations being performed in a given brain area. The two techniques that have
been most successful and have attracted the most attention—positron emission tomography
(PET) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)—both measure blood flow.
14
The
connection between neural activity (spiking) and blood flow is relatively intuitive—greater firing
rates require more energy, which requires more metabolism to provide the energy. This in turn
requires both oxygen and metabolites, which are provided by blood. But herein lies one of the
current unknowns underlying neuroimaging—the mechanism by which greater blood flow is
generated. What investigators do know is that the increase in blood flow exceeds oxygen
demand, a critical factor in creating the blood oxygen level dependent (BOLD) contrast that
provides the signal in fMRI. The details of the relationship will likely ultimately be important for
understanding particular uses of fMRI and some current researchers are very concerned about the
current deficit in our understanding (see Fitzpatrick & Rothman, 1999 for a report on a
McDonnell Foundation sponsored conference devoted to this issue). Most researchers are
sufficiently confident in the relation between neural activity and measures of blood flow that
they are not worried about an artifact arising at this point. This confidence is largely a result of
the fact that neuroimaging has produced many determinate results that have been incorporated
into information processing models of cognition.
In the case of both PET and fMRI the process of detecting the signal relies on application of
principles from physics. In most PET studies, for example, radioactively labeled H 2  O is injected
into the bloodstream. With a short half-life, it decays as it is carried by the blood, ejecting
positrons as it does so. A positron will travel only a short distance until it collides with an
electron, whereupon it is annihilated and emits two gamma rays directed 180
o
opposite each
other. The PET scanner contains detectors surrounding the head that record an event only when
two gamma rays arrive at different locations simultaneously; a sophisticated computational
approach known as tomography (from the Greek word  tomos , which means  cut ) is then
employed to determine the site of the annihilation in the cut defined by the plane of the
scanner.
15
These basic processes are reasonably well understood and are not the focus of concern
in the application of PET and fMRI to measuring neural activity.
14  There are techniques for using PET to directly measure metabolism by using radioactively labeled 18-fluoro-2-
deoxyglucose, but these are used primarily in diagnostic studies, not functional studies.
15  MRI uses a strong magnetic field in which the nuclei of elements which have an odd atomic weight (e.g.,
hydrogen) are induced to align the axes of their spin. A brief pulse of radiowaves can perturb this alignment by
tipping the orientation of spin, thereby increasing the energetic state of the nuclei. When the pulse ends, they precess
back into their aligned state, releasing energy in the form of radio waves whose frequency reflects the particular
atom and its environment.


<!-- Page 16 -->

Bechtel: The Epistemology of Evidence in Cognitive Neuroscience  p.  16
Most of the epistemic issues concerning PET and fMRI turn on the connection to cognitive
operations. The challenge stems from the fact that during the performance of a cognitive task
there is blood flow throughout the brain. One might think that one could just focus on increased
blood flow in the performance of a task, but that requires being able to specify the base line from
which the increase is measured (see Gusnard & Raichle, 2001). While people are awake, they are
always cognitively active. Leave people in a scanner with no direction to do anything specific
and they will think about whatever they choose. Beyond the problem posed by identifying a
baseline, a more serious objection is that such an approach, if successful, would only show us
areas that are involved in the performance of a task, but would not show what operation these
areas perform.
One strategy for linking brain activity as measured in neuroimaging with cognition that has been
widely employed is called the  subtractive method .
16
This involves imaging a person while
performing two different tasks. One of these is thought to employ one (or a very small number
of) cognitive operations additional to those employed by the other. Researchers then subtract the
activation measured during the simpler task from that measured during the more complex task.
The result is a difference image showing the increased or decreased activations measured during
the second task. The level of difference (or the statistical significance level associated with the
difference) is color coded in the pictures of the brain commonly shown in neuroimaging papers.
The area(s) revealed in the difference image are regarded as the locus of the additional
operations.
The subtractive method is well illustrated in a landmark early neuroimaging study. Steven
Petersen and his colleagues (Petersen, Fox, Posner, Mintun, & Raichle, 1988; Petersen, Fox,
Posner, Mintun, & Raichle, 1989) subtracted the activation produced when participants read
nouns aloud from that produced when they read the nouns silently, generated verbs associated
with them and pronounced these aloud.
17
Note that the second task involves two of the same
component operations as the simpler task—reading the noun and pronouncing a word aloud—but
adds an additional component—generating the verb. The increased activation, so the reasoning
goes, reflects the performance of the additional task. The investigators found increased
activation in three areas: anterior cingulated cortex, left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, and the
right inferior lateral cerebellum. They provided alternative explanations of the anterior
cingulated and cerebellum increases and interpreted the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex as the
brain area responsible for the semantic operation of generating the verb.
This procedure is an adaptation of one initially developed by F. C. Donders (1868) for use in
chronometric studies of cognitive process. In chronometric studies, the researcher subtracts the
time taken to perform one from that required for another task and the difference is thought to
reflect the time required for the additional operations required in the longer task. In its
application to chronometric studies, the subtractive method was broadly criticized in the 1960s.
Saul Sternberg (1969) pointed out, for example, that it assumed that the additional cognitive
16  Alternative approaches are being developed (see, for example, Frith & Friston, 1997)
17  Petersen and his colleagues also performed two preliminary subtractions: (1) looking at a fixation point from
passively reading words and (2) passively reading words from reading them aloud.


<!-- Page 17 -->

Bechtel: The Epistemology of Evidence in Cognitive Neuroscience  p.  17
activity was a pure insertion into a sequential set of processes, and this assumption might well be
false. The additional operations may involve interactions with the operation in the simpler task,
causing them, for example, to be performed more slowly. As a result, the increased reaction time
may not reflect simply the additional operation. He advocated replacing the subtractive method
in studies of mental chronometry with more complex techniques which measure whether
different tasks interfere with each other (for detailed discussion, see Posner, 1978).
Neuroimagers have returned to the original simple subtraction approach of Donders although
neuroimaging would seem to confront the same problem of assuming a pure insertion of the
additional operation (e.g., generating a verb). The additional operation could conceivably interact
with and alter the operations performed in the simpler task (reading the noun or pronouncing a
word). Marcus Raichle (1998) defends use of the subtractive method by arguing that imaging
itself will reveal any changes in activation in other brain areas that would indicate interactions
with other processes. There are, however, reasons for skepticism: imaging procedures will only
identify statistically significant changes in activation elsewhere in the brain; if there are resulting
accommodations elsewhere in the brain, they may fall below this threshold of significance and
thus not be noted. Moreover, given the computational demands of calculating responses
throughout the brain, researchers often only look for significant responses in areas they already
suspect of being involved in the operation in question and this may lead them to miss less the
increased activations stemming from interactions.
So as to better appreciate the epistemic issues arising in neuroimaging research, I will turn to a
specific case in which new localizationist claims were advanced on the basis of neuroimaging.
Cognitive psychologists have decomposed memory processes temporally into operations of
encoding, storage, and retrieval. Storage is assumed to be widely distributed in cortex, but many
researchers have pursued the hypothesis that encoding and retrieval are more localized processes
whose neural mechanisms might be uncovered. Moreover, these processes could be
differentiated in terms of how factors thought to affect either encoding or retrieval specifically
influence overall memory performance. Attempts to relate encoding and retrieval processes to
the brain through lesions, however, faced the limitation that any measure of memory required
both encoding and retrieval, and so it was not possible to determine whether the lesion impaired
encoding or retrieval processes. Neuroimaging offered the opportunity to determine what brain
areas were selectively involved during encoding and retrieval.
Accordingly, shortly after the introduction of PET to study cognitive activity, Endel Tulving and
a number of his associates initiated a study of encoding and retrieval processes associated with
episodic memory—the memory a person has of being directly involved in an event in the past.
(An episodic memory is different from a person’s knowledge of being involved in the event,
which the person could have acquired from the reports of others). To use the subtractive method,
Tulving and his collaborators needed to develop two tasks to compare and they choose tasks that
differed in the  level of processing  of words, a manipulation that was known from purely
behavioral studies to affect how well the stimuli were encoded (Craik & Tulving, 1975). For the
shallow encoding conditions, participants were asked whether the word contained an  a , whereas
for the deeper encoding condition they were asked whether it referred to a living thing. A
subsequent recognition memory task revealed that participants recognized more of the words


<!-- Page 18 -->

Bechtel: The Epistemology of Evidence in Cognitive Neuroscience  p.  18
when the encoding task required them to determine whether the referent was living, confirming
that better encoding occurred in the deeper encoding condition. When the PET images made
under shallow encoding conditions were subtracted from those made under deeper encoding,
significantly increased activation was found in a region in left inferior prefrontal cortex (Kapur et
al., 1994). To study episodic retrieval Tulving presented participants either with novel
meaningful sentences or with meaningful sentences that they had heard 24 hours previously.
Although the participants were not required to register their recognition of the previously heard
sentences, when the blood flow for novel sentences was subtracted from that for previously
heard sentences, increased blood flow was found in right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex and
bilaterally in two regions in parietal cortex. There were also regions of reduced blood flow in the
temporal cortex.
The main finding of these studies was that encoding of episodic memory resulted in increased
blood flow in the  left  prefrontal cortex whereas retrieval produced increased blood flow in the
 right  prefrontal cortex. This led Tulving and his collaborators to propose the hemispheric
encoding/retrieval asymmetry (HERA) model, which asserts that:
the left and right prefrontal cortical regions are differentially involved in episodic and
semantic memory processes. Left prefrontal cortical regions are involved in retrieval of
information from semantic memory to an extent that right prefrontal areas are not, at least
insofar as verbal information is concerned. Left prefrontal cortical regions are involved in
encoding information about novel happenings into episodic memory to an extent that
right prefrontal areas are not, at least insofar as verbal information is concerned. Right
prefrontal cortical regions are involved in retrieval of episodic information to an extent
that left prefrontal areas are not. Right prefrontal cortical regions are involved in retrieval
of episodic information to an extent that does not hold for retrieval of semantic
information (Tulving, Kapur, Craik, Moscovitch, & Houle, 1994, p. 2018)
It is important to note the role of subtraction in the two studies on which HERA is based. Only
with subtraction did the specific areas in left and right prefrontal cortex stand out. Buckner
(1996) noted that prior to subtraction in the episodic recall task, activation was found in left
prefrontal areas as well as right prefrontal areas. These areas were subtracted out since they were
also elicited by presentation of novel sentences. Presumably these are areas that are involved in
semantic processing of the sentences. But they may also figure in the network of areas involved
in episodic retrieval. Tulving in fact qualified his presentation of HERA in a number of ways,
one of which was to claim only that the right prefrontal areas are more involved in episodic
retrieval than the areas on the left. This might be seen as a concession that the subtracted areas
might contribute something, but it is misleading. There is no basis for quantifying the
contributions—the regions in the left hemisphere may be carrying out processes just as important
to recognition as those in the right. A similar concern arises about the subtraction in the episodic
encoding study. In that study, what was subtracted was the activation involved in shallow
processing. But these processes may also contribute to the deep processing that is thought to be
involved in encoding of episodic memory.
Tulving and his collaborators are quite cognizant that the areas they have identified in their
neuroimaging studies may only perform a component operation in the encoding or retrieval


<!-- Page 19 -->

Bechtel: The Epistemology of Evidence in Cognitive Neuroscience  p.  19
process and that the whole process may involve a complex network of other areas each
performing a different operation underlying encoding or retrieval. In their study of episodic
encoding, they specifically comment:
Although left prefrontal activation was associated with enhanced memory performance in
our study, it seems quite unlikely that this region constitutes the locus of memory storage.
It is more plausible that the left inferior prefrontal structures identified are part of a more
complex network of cortical and subcortical structures that subserve memory functions
(Kapur et al., 1994, p. 2010).
My contention so far is that some of the areas relevant to encoding or retrieval may be hidden by
reliance on subtraction.
A second concern that arises from the subtraction design is characterizing the additional task that
differentiates the focal task and the subtracted task. Tulving and his collaborators explicitly note
that the areas they identify as involved in episodic encoding overlap substantially with those
Petersen et al. identified as involved in semantic processing. Tulving proposes that the two tasks
are in fact linked—semantic processing is one form of deeper processing that enhances encoding.
But then the question naturally arises as to whether the areas activated in Tulving’s studies play
any role in encoding  per se . Adina Roskies raised this issue in a commentary that appeared in the
same issue as the Tulving studies:
While it is possible that this brain area is directly involved in memory processes, it is also
possible and consistent with other literature that this area is specifically involved in
semantic processing or response generation, both of which occur in this task, and that the
enhancement of recognition that is reported could be due to synaptic changes in other
brain regions, even those lacking direct connections with prefrontal cortex (Roskies,
1994, p. 1990).
Another qualification in Tulving et al.’s presentation of HERA is that the results may only hold
for verbal information. Employing a refined imaging procedure that allows researchers to
analyze separately encoding episodes for which there is later recall from those for which recall
fails (thereby avoiding reliance on depth of processing as a surrogate for successful encoding),
John Gabrieli and his colleagues demonstrated right inferior frontal cortex activation, as well as
bilateral hippocampal activations, when pictures were substituted for words in an encoding
studies (Brewer, Zhao, Desmond, Glover, & Gabrieli, 1998). Likewise, Kelley et al. (1998)
showed right prefrontal activity in encoding of unfamiliar faces and bilateral activations with
line-drawings of nameable objects. Together these suggest that the left hemisphere activations in
Kapur et al. may be a result of the use of verbal materials, and may have to do more with their
semantic processing than episodic memory encoding.
Although I have focused on a number of criticisms that have been advanced against HERA, it
remains a focal hypothesis in the literature, one whose evidential support is provided solely by
neuroimaging results. Its critics, relying on different interpretations of these and other
neuroimaging results, contend that it is an artifact. To appreciate how this controversy has
developed and appraise it, let’s return to the three criteria I have maintained that scientists
employ in evaluating artifacts. First, there is little doubt that Tulving and his collaborators
produced quite determinate results, ones that could be replicated by others. Second, Tulving’s


<!-- Page 20 -->

Bechtel: The Epistemology of Evidence in Cognitive Neuroscience  p.  20
results receive little corroboration from other techniques. In particular, lesion studies, from
which one might have hoped to acquire corroborating evidence, did not provide any support
since lesions in the prefrontal areas do not generate deficits in either encoding or retrieval of
episodic memories. So that left the results vulnerable. Third, the results did little to advance a
detailed mechanism of encoding and retrieval. Such advance would require some account of the
nature of the operations involved in encoding or retrieval, and to date there is little in the
literature to suggest what these might be.
These shortcomings count against HERA specifically. They are not, though, grounds for
pessimism about the overall enterprise of invoking neuroimaging and its potential to help
develop mechanistic models of memory. Recent neuroimaging studies have identified yet more
brain locations that show increased activation in encoding and retrieval studies in addition to
those first targeted by Tulving. Reflecting on these results, Gabrieli comments:
it has been difficult for psychologists to define multiple, specific processes that mediate
episodic encoding or retrieval. . . . Yet it is virtually certain that there are multiple
encoding and retrieval processes which vary according to materials and task demands.
From this perspective, the variability in imaging findings suggests that future imaging
studies may provide an impetus not only for more precise process-structure mappings but
also for a new level of rigor and precision in understanding the psychological
organization of episodic memory (Gabrieli, 2001, p. 281).
That is to say, imaging may turn out to be a powerful discovery strategy—as imaging discovers
multiple areas involved in a cognitive task, it motivates inquiry into what operations these areas
perform. Moreover, it can also serve as a tool for answering such questions. As the number of
imaging studies using different tasks increases, it becomes possible to conduct meta-analyses
that reveal the range of tasks in which a given brain area is activated (Cabeza & Nyberg, 2000).
By considering what operations might be common to these various tasks, imaging researchers
can contribute to the project of identifying new component operations. If the neuroimaging
results do result in new proposals as to the operations involved in memory encoding and
retrieval, and if these results are corroborated by other approaches such as lesion studies (perhaps
using TMS to create temporary lesions), neuroimaging will realize its promise as a tool for
developing improved accounts of mental mechanisms.
The epistemic issues raised by PET and fMRI are of critical importance since these techniques,
together with ERP and lesion studies, are the primary tools for studying the neural foundations of
cognitive processing in humans. Their strength is that, unlike lesion studies, they can correlate
activity in the brain with cognitive operations a person is performing. Although concerns remain
about the origins of the signal measured, PET and fMRI are generally regarded as providing
highly credible information about neural activity. The main epistemic issues concern the
procedures for relating this information to cognitive operations. A primary procedure for doing
this is the subtractive method and I have focused on some of the epistemic issues it raises. The
strategies for evaluating the results of this technique are the same as I identified earlier—the
determinateness of the results, consistency with results obtained by other techniques, and
coherence with theoretical perspectives. One sign of determinateness is the stability of brain
areas showing increased activation across tasks and studies involving the same operation.
Although earlier analyses raised doubts about such stability (Poeppel, 1996), more recently


<!-- Page 21 -->

Bechtel: The Epistemology of Evidence in Cognitive Neuroscience  p.  21
others have found considerable agreement between studies (Corbetta, 1998; Cabeza & Nyberg,
2000). Some of the most celebrated results of imaging studies identify brain areas active in a
cognitive task different from those whose damage resulting in deficits on those tasks. In one
respect, such differences are what one hopes for—the motivation for developing a new technique
is to discover something new. The verb-generate studies of Petersen et al. generated what was at
the time an unexpected finding that left prefrontal cortex was the site of semantic processing and
Tulving studies indicated frontal activity in encoding episodic memories whereas lesions there
do not seem to impair such encoding. The differences in results then prompt attempts to generate
consistency, often by calibrating and interpreting the different results in light of each other. The
final measure is that results fit into coherent theoretical perspectives, especially accounts of how
neurocognitive mechanisms work. In addition to linking brain regions with component
operations of cognitive processing, this requires accounts that agree with the known
neuroarchitecture of the brain and show how the component operations figure in performing a
variety of cognitive tasks. This is an ongoing effort in cognitive neuroscience that appears to be
making rapid progress, which in turn supports the credibility of the empirical evidence imaging
produces.
 5. Conclusions
 Evidence in science is frequently the focus of contest. This is true in cognitive neuroscience as in
other sciences. I have examined the development of three of the principal sources of evidence
linking cognitive processes to the brain—lesion studies, single-cell recording, and neuroimaging.
In each case, the results advanced involve manipulation of the phenomena under study and
researchers must evaluate the results as to whether they reflect in the appropriate manner the
component operations in cognitive mechanisms. Otherwise, critics can dismiss the results as only
artifacts resulting from the mode of intervention used to produce them. Such assessment
typically does not depend upon in-depth understanding of how the technique generates results
but on the nature of the results produced. I have tried to show how researchers commonly appeal
to three different features of the evidence itself to determine whether results from these
techniques of cognitive neuroscience are artifacts. First is whether there is a definite pattern in
the results that can be procured reliably. Second is whether the results are consistent with results
produced by other techniques. Third is whether the results fit into a coherent theoretical account.
 References
 Adrian, E. D. (1926). The impulses produced by sensory nerve endings. Part I.  Journal of
Physiology (London), 61 , 49-72.
Adrian, E. D., & Bronk, D. W. (1928). The discharge of impulses in motor nerve fibres. Part I.
Impulses in single fibres of the phrenic nerve.  Journal of Physiology, 66 , 81-101.
Adrian, E. D., & Bronk, D. W. (1929). The discharge of impulses in motor nerve fibres. Part II.
The frequency of discharge in reflex and voluntary contractions.  Journal of Physiology,
66 , 119-151.
Adrian, E. D., & Zotterman, Y. (1926). The impulses produced by sensory nerve endings. Part
2: The response of a single end-organ.  Journal of Physiology, 61 , 151-171.


<!-- Page 22 -->

Bechtel: The Epistemology of Evidence in Cognitive Neuroscience  p.  22
Bates, E. (1994). Modularity, domain specificity and the development of language.  Discussions
in Neuroscience, 10 (1 and 2), 136-153.
Bechtel, W. (1995). Deciding on the data: Epistemological problems surrounding instruments
and research techniques in cell biology,  PSA 1994  (Vol. 2, pp. 167-178).
Bechtel, W. (2000). From imaging to believing: Epistemic issues in generating biological data.
In R. Creath & J. Maienschein (Eds.),  Biology and epistemology  (pp. 138-163).
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Bechtel, W. (2001a). Decomposing and localizing vision: An exemplar for cognitive
neuroscience. In W. Bechtel & P. Mandik & J. Mundale & R. S. Stufflebeam (Eds.),
 Philosophy and the neurosciences: A reader  (pp. 225-249). Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Bechtel, W. (2001b). Linking cognition and brain: The cognitive neuroscience of language. In
W. Bechtel & P. Mandik & J. Mundale & R. S. Stufflebeam (Eds.),  Philosophy and the
neurosciences: A reader  (pp. 152-171). Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Bechtel, W. (2002a). Aligning multiple research techniques in cognitive neuroscience: Why is it
important?  Philosophy of Science, 69 , S48-S58.
Bechtel, W. (2002b). Decomposing the mind-brain: A long-term pursuit.  Brain and Mind, 3 ,
229-242.
Bechtel, W. (in press).  Discovering cell mechanisms . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bechtel, W., & Abrahamsen, A. (under review). Explanation: A mechanist alternative.
Bechtel, W., & Richardson, R. C. (1993).  Discovering complexity: Decomposition and
localization as scientific research strategies . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Berger, H. (1929). Über daas Elektroenkephalogramm des Menschen.  Archiv für Psychiatrie und
Nervenkrankheiten, 87 (527-570).
Brewer, J. B., Zhao, Z., Desmond, J. E., Glover, G. H., & Gabrieli, J. D. E. (1998). Making
memories: Brain activity that predicts how well visual experience will be remembered.
 Science, 281 , 1185-1187.
Broca, P. (1861). Remarques sur le siége de la faculté du langage articulé, suivies d’une
observation d’aphemie (perte de la parole).  Bulletin de la Société Anatomique, 6 , 343-
357.
Buckner, R. L. (1996). Beyond HERA: Contributions of specific prefrontal brain areas to long-
term memory retrieval.  Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 3 (2), 149-158.
Cabeza, R., & Nyberg, L. (2000). Imaging cognition II: An empirical review of 275 PET and
fMRI studies.  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12 , 1-47.
Corbetta, M. (1998). Frontoparietal cortical networks for directing attention and the eye to visual
locations: identical, independent, or overlapping neural systems?  Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 95 , 831-838.
Craik, F. I. M., & Tulving, E. (1975). Depth of processing and retention of words in episodic
memory.  Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 104 , 268-294.
Craver, C. (2002). Interlevel experiments and multilevel mechanisms in the neuroscience of
memory.  Philosophy of Science, 69 , S83-S97.
Donders, F. C. (1868). Over de snelheid van psychische processen. Onderzoekingen gedaan in
het Physiologisch Laboratorium der Utrechtsche Hoogeschool: 1868-1869.  Tweede
Reeks, 2 , 92-120.
Farah, M. (1990).  Visual agnosia: Disorders of object recognition and what they tell us about
normal vision . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.


<!-- Page 23 -->

Bechtel: The Epistemology of Evidence in Cognitive Neuroscience  p.  23
Feinberg, T. E., & Farah, M. J. (2000). A historical perspective on cognitive neuroscience. In M.
J. Farah & T. E. Feinberg (Eds.),  Patient-based approaches to cognitive neuroscience
 (pp. 3-20). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Finger, S. (2000).  Minds behind the brain: A history of the pioneers and their discoveries .
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fitzpatrick, S. M., & Rothman, D. L. (1999). New approaches to functional neuroenergetics.
 Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 11 , 467-471.
Frith, C. D., & Friston, K. J. (1997). Studying brain function with neuroimaging. In M. Rugg
(Ed.),  Cognitive neuroscience  (pp. 169-195). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2001). Functional neuroimaging of episodic memory. In R. Cabeza & A.
Kingstone (Eds.),  Handbook of functional neuroimaging of cognition  (pp. 49-72).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Geschwind, N. (1979). Specializations of the human brain.  Scientific American, 238 (3), 158-168.
Glennan, S. (1996). Mechanisms and the nature of causation.  Erkenntnis, 44 , 50-71.
Glennan, S. (2002). Rethinking mechanistic explanation.  Philosophy of Science, 69 , S342-S353.
Glymour, C. (1994). Methods of cognitive neuropsychology.  British Journal for the Philosophy
of Science, 45 , 815-835.
Goldman-Rakic, P. S. (1987). Circuitry of primate prefrontal cortex and regulation of behavior
by representational memory. In J. M. Brookhart & V. B. Mountcastle & S. R. Geiger
(Eds.),  Handbook of Physiology: The Nervous System  (Vol. 5, pp. 373-417). Bethesda,
Maryland: American Physiological Society.
Gregory, R. L. (1968). Models and the localization of functions in the central nervous system. In
A. D. J. Robertson (Ed.),  Key papers in cybernetics  (pp. 91-102). London: Butterworth.
Gusnard, D. A., & Raichle, M. E. (2001). Searching for a baseline: functional imaging and the
resting human brain.  Nature Reviews/Neurosience, 2 , 685-694.
Hanson, N. R. (1958).  Patterns of discovery . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hartline, H. K. (1938). The response of single optic nerve fibers of the vertebrate retina.
 American Journal of Physiology, 113 , 59-60.
Hinton, G. E., & Shallice, T. (1991). Lesioning a connectionist network: Investigations of
acquired dyslexia.  Psychological Review, 98 , 74-95.
Hubel, D. H. (1982). Evolution of ideas on the primary visual cortex, 1955-1978: A biased
historical account.  Bioscience Reports, 2 , 435-469.
Hubel, D. H., & Wiesel, T. N. (1962). Receptive fields, binocular interaction and functional
architecture in the cat's visual cortex.  Journal of Physiology (London), 160 , 106-154.
Hubel, D. H., & Wiesel, T. N. (1965). Receptive fields and functional architecture in two non-
striate visual areas (18 and 19) of the cat.  Journal of Neurophysiology, 195 , 229-289.
Hubel, D. H., & Wiesel, T. N. (1968). Receptive fields and functional architecture of monkey
striate cortex.  Journal of Physiology (London), 195 , 215-243.
Kapur, S., Craik, F. I. M., Tulving, E., Wilson, A. A., Houle, S., & Brown, G. M. (1994).
Neuroanatomical correlates of encoding in episodic memory: Levels of processing effect.
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (USA), 91 , 2008-2111.
Kelley, W. L., Miezin, F. M., McDermott, K., Buckner, R. L., Raichle, M. E., Cohen, N. J., &
Petersen, S. E. (1998). Hemispheric specialization in human dorsal frontal cortex and
medial temporal lobes for verbal and nonverbal memory encoding.  Neuron, 20 , 927-936.


<!-- Page 24 -->

Bechtel: The Epistemology of Evidence in Cognitive Neuroscience  p.  24
Kuffler, S. W. (1953). Discharge patterns and functional organization of mammalian retina.
 Journal of Neurophysiology, 16 , 37-68.
Kuhn, T. S. (1962/1970).  The structure of scientific revolutions  (Second ed.). Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Kutas, M., & Dale, A. (1997). Electrical and magnetic readings of mental function. In M. D.
Rugg (Ed.),  Cognitive neuroscience  (pp. 197-242). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lashley, K. S. (1950). In search of the engram.  Symposia of the Society for Experimental
Biology, IV. Physiological Mechanisms in Animal Behaviour , 454-482.
Latour, B. (1987).  Science in action . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Lettvin, J. Y., Maturana, H. R., McCulloch, W. S., & Pitts, W. H. (1959). What the frog's eye
tells the frog's brain.  Proceedings of the Institute of Radio Engineers, 47 , 1940-1951.
Luck, S. J., & Ford, M. A. (1998). On the role of selective attention in visual perception.
 Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (USA), 95 , 825-830.
Machamer, P., Darden, L., & Craver, C. (2000). Thinking about mechanisms.  Philosophy of
Science, 67 , 1-25.
Marr, D. C. (1982).  Vision: A computation investigation into the human representational system
and processing of visual information . San Francisco: Freeman.
Mishkin, M. (1966). Visual mechanisms beyond the striate cortex. In R. W. Russel (Ed.),
 Frontiers in physiological psychology . New York: Academic.
Mishkin, M., & Pribram, K. H. (1954). Visual discrimination performance following partial
ablations of the temporal lobe: I. Ventral vs. lateral.  Journal of Comparative and
Physiological Psychology, 47 , 14-20.
Mundale, J. (1998). Brain mapping. In W. Bechtel & G. Graham (Eds.),  A companion to
cognitive science . Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Newsome, W. T., Britten, K. H., & Movshon, J. A. (1989). Neuronal correlates of a perceptual
decision.  Nature, 341 , 52-54.
O'Keefe, J. A., & Nadel, L. (1978).  The hippocampus as a cognitive map . Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Petersen, S. E., & Fiez, J. A. (1993). The processing of single words studied with positron
emission tomography.  Annual Review of Neuroscience, 16 , 509-530.
Petersen, S. E., Fox, P. J., Posner, M. I., Mintun, M., & Raichle, M. E. (1989). Positron emission
tomographic studies of the processing single words.  Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
1 (2), 153-170.
Petersen, S. E., Fox, P. T., Posner, M. I., Mintun, M., & Raichle, M. E. (1988). Positron emission
tomographic studies of the cortical anatomy of single-word processing.  Nature, 331 (18
February), 585-588.
Poeppel, D. (1996). A critical review of PET studies of phonological processing.  Brain and
Language, 55 (3), 317-351.
Posner, M. I. (1978).  Chronometric explorations of mind . Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Raichle, M. E. (1998). Behind the scenes of functional brain imaging: A historical and
physiological perspective.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 95 , 765-
772.
Roskies, A. L. (1994). Mapping memory with positron emission tomography.  Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences (USA), 91 , 1989-1991.


<!-- Page 25 -->

Bechtel: The Epistemology of Evidence in Cognitive Neuroscience  p.  25
Schaffner, K. A. (2001). Extrapolation from animal models: Social life, sex, and super models.
In P. McLaughlin (Ed.),  Theory and method in the neurosciences  (Vol. Pitt-Konstanz
Colloquium 5). Pittsburgh: Pittsburgh University Press.
Scoville, W. B. (1968). Amnesia after bilateral medial temporal-lobe excision: Introduction to
case H.M.  Neuropsychologia, 6 , 211-213.
Shallice, T. (1988).  From neuropsychology to mental structure . New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Squire, L. R. (1987).  Memory and brain . New York: Oxford University Press.
Sternberg, S. (1969). The discovery of processing stages: Extension of Donders' method.  Acta
Psychologica, 30 , 276-315.
Talbot, S. A., & Marshall, W. H. (1941). Physiological studies on neural mechanisms of visual
localization and discrimination.  American Journal of Opthalmology, 24 , 1255-1263.
Tulving, E., Kapur, S., Craik, F. I., M., Moscovitch, M., & Houle, S. (1994). Hemispheric
encoding/retrieval asymmetry in episodic memory: Positron emission tomography
findings.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (USA), 91 , 2016-2020.
Uttal, W. R. (2001).  The new phrenology: The limits of localizing cognitive processes in the
brain . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
van Essen, D. C., & Gallant, J. L. (1994). Neural mechanisms of form and motion processing in
the primate visual system.  Neuron, 13 , 1-10.
van Orden, G. C., Pennington, B. F., & Stone, G. O. (2001). What do double dissociations
prove? Inductive methods and isolable systems.  Cognitive Science, 25 , 111-172.
Walsh, V., & Cowey, A. (1998). Magnetic stimulation studies of visual cognition.  Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 2 (3), 103-110.
Wernicke, C. (1874).  Der aphasische Symptomenkomplex: eine psychologische Studie auf
anatomischer Basis . Breslau: Cohn and Weigert.
Woolsey, C. (1960). Organization of the cortical auditory system: a review and a synthesis. In G.
L. Rasmussen & W. F. Windle (Eds.),  Neural mechanisms of the auditory and vestibular
systems  (pp. 165-180). Springfield, IL: Charles C. Thomas.
Zawidzki, T. W., & Bechtel, W. (2004). Legacy: decomposition and localization in cognitive
neuroscience. In C. E. Erneling & D. M. Johnson (Eds.),  The Mind As a Scientific Object .
Oxford: Oxford University Press.